    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS. Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    Which he did give himself- I know not how,
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    The time of life- arming myself with patience
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    That govern us below.
  CASSIUS. Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind. But this same day
    Must end that work the ides of March begun.
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
    Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
    If not, why then this parting was well made.
  CASSIUS. Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
  BRUTUS. Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    The end of this day's business ere it come!
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!           Exeunt.




SCENE II.
The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

  BRUTUS. Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.             Loud alarum.
    Let them set on at once, for I perceive
    But cold demeanor in Octavia's wing,
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Another part of the field.

Alarums. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  TITINIUS. O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

                       Enter Pindarus.

  PINDARUS. Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
  CASSIUS. This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  TITINIUS. They are, my lord.
  CASSIUS. Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again, that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
  TITINIUS. I will be here again, even with a thought.     Exit.
  CASSIUS. Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] O my lord!
  CASSIUS. What news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] Titinius is enclosed round about
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
    Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
    He's ta'en [Shout.] And, hark! They shout for joy.
  CASSIUS. Come down; behold no more.
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
                                              Pindarus descends.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;
    Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
    That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
  PINDARUS. So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
    Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.              Exit.

                Re-enter Titinius with Messala.

  MESSALA. It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
    Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
    As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
  TITINIUS. These tidings would well comfort Cassius.
  MESSALA. Where did you leave him?
  TITINIUS. All disconsolate,
    With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  MESSALA. Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS. He lies not like the living. O my heart!
  MESSALA. Is not that he?
  TITINIUS. No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;
    Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
  MESSALA. Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  TITINIUS. What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
  MESSALA. Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
    The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
    Into his ears. I may say "thrusting" it,
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.
  TITINIUS. Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.        Exit Messala.
    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
    And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
    By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
    Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
                                                  Kills himself.

       Alarum. Re-enter Messala, with Brutus, young Cato,
                         and others.

  BRUTUS. Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
  MESSALA. Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
  BRUTUS. Titinius' face is upward.
  CATO. He is slain.
  BRUTUS. O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    In our own proper entrails.                     Low alarums.
  CATO. Brave Titinius!
    Look whe'er he have not crown'd dead Cassius!
  BRUTUS. Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    It is impossible that ever Rome
    Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears
    To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
    I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,
    Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
    Labio and Flavio, set our battles on.
    'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.              Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter, fighting, Soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, young Cato,
Lucilius, and others.

  BRUTUS. Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
  CATO. What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
  BRUTUS. And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
    Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus!       Exit.
  LUCILIUS. O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
    And mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Yield, or thou diest.
  LUCILIUS. Only I yield to die.
    [Offers money.] There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight:
    Kill Brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
  FIRST SOLDIER. We must not. A noble prisoner!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.

                         Enter Antony.

    Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  LUCILIUS. Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
  ANTONY. This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
    A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
    And see wheer Brutus be alive or dead,
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
    How everything is chanced.                           Exeunt.




SCENE V.
Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.

  BRUTUS. Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  CLITUS. Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
  BRUTUS. Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word:
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
  BRUTUS. Peace then, no words.
  CLITUS. I'll rather kill myself.
  BRUTUS. Hark thee, Dardanius.                        Whispers.
  DARDANIUS. Shall I do such a deed?
  CLITUS. O Dardanius!
  DARDANIUS. O Clitus!
  CLITUS. What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  DARDANIUS. To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
  CLITUS. Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    That it runs over even at his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
  VOLUMNIUS. What says my lord?
  BRUTUS. Why, this, Volumnius:
    The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me
    Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
    And this last night here in Philippi fields.
    I know my hour is come.
  VOLUMNIUS. Not so, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.
    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
  VOLUMNIUS. That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                                   Alarum still.
  CLITUS. Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  BRUTUS. Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
    My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    I found no man but he was true to me.
    I shall have glory by this losing day,
    More than Octavius and Mark Antony
    By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    So, fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history.
    Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    That have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            Alarum. Cry within, "Fly, fly, fly!"
  CLITUS. Fly, my lord, fly.
  BRUTUS. Hence! I will follow.
                        Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius.
    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
  STRATO. Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, good Strato.              Runs on his sword.
    Caesar, now be still;
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            Dies.

     Alarum. Retreat. Enter Octavius, Antony, Messala,
                 Lucilius, and the Army.

  OCTAVIUS. What man is that?
  MESSALA. My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?
  STRATO. Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honor by his death.
  LUCILIUS. So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
  OCTAVIUS. All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
    Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  STRATO. Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
  OCTAVIUS. Do so, good Messala.
  MESSALA. How died my master, Strato?
  STRATO. I held the sword, and he did run on it.
  MESSALA. Octavius, then take him to follow thee
    That did the latest service to my master.
  ANTONY. This was the noblest Roman of them all.
    All the conspirators, save only he,
    Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
    He only, in a general honest thought
    And common good to all, made one of them.
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
    And say to all the world, "This was a man!"
  OCTAVIUS. According to his virtue let us use him
    With all respect and rites of burial.
    Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
    Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.              Exeunt.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1606


THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR

by William Shakespeare




Dramatis Personae

      Lear, King of Britain.
      King of France.
      Duke of Burgundy.
      Duke of Cornwall.
      Duke of Albany.
      Earl of Kent.
      Earl of Gloucester.
      Edgar, son of Gloucester.
      Edmund, bastard son to Gloucester.
      Curan, a courtier.
      Old Man, tenant to Gloucester.
      Doctor.
      Lear's Fool.
      Oswald, steward to Goneril.
      A Captain under Edmund's command.
      Gentlemen.
      A Herald.
      Servants to Cornwall.

      Goneril, daughter to Lear.
      Regan, daughter to Lear.
      Cordelia, daughter to Lear.

      Knights attending on Lear, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers,
        Attendants.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



Scene: - Britain.


ACT I. Scene I.
[King Lear's Palace.]

Enter Kent, Gloucester, and Edmund. [Kent and Glouceste converse.
Edmund stands back.]

  Kent. I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
     Cornwall.
  Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  Kent. Is not this your son, my lord?
  Glou. His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now I am braz'd to't.
  Kent. I cannot conceive you.
  Glou. Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
     had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
  Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  Glou. But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- Do you know this noble gentleman,
     Edmund?
  Edm. [comes forward] No, my lord.
  Glou. My Lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  Edm. My services to your lordship.
  Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better.
  Edm. Sir, I shall study deserving.
  Glou. He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 Sound a sennet.
     The King is coming.

      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
      Albany and Cornwall; next, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, with
                              Followers.

  Lear. Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
  Glou. I shall, my liege.
                                 Exeunt [Gloucester and Edmund].
  Lear. Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     Give me the map there. Know we have divided
     In three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     To shake all cares and business from our age,
     Conferring them on younger strengths while we
     Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
     And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
     We have this hour a constant will to publish
     Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
     Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters
     (Since now we will divest us both of rule,
     Interest of territory, cares of state),
     Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
     That we our largest bounty may extend
     Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
     Our eldest-born, speak first.
  Gon. Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
     Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
     Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
     No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
     As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
     A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
     Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
  Cor. [aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
  Lear. Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
     With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
     We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
     Be this perpetual.- What says our second daughter,
     Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
  Reg. Sir, I am made
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
     I find she names my very deed of love;
     Only she comes too short, that I profess
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     And find I am alone felicitate
     In your dear Highness' love.
  Cor. [aside] Then poor Cordelia!
     And yet not so; since I am sure my love's
     More richer than my tongue.
  Lear. To thee and thine hereditary ever
     Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
     No less in space, validity, and pleasure
     Than that conferr'd on Goneril.- Now, our joy,
     Although the last, not least; to whose young love
     The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
     Strive to be interest; what can you say to draw
     A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
  Cor. Nothing, my lord.
  Lear. Nothing?
  Cor. Nothing.
  Lear. Nothing can come of nothing. Speak again.
  Cor. Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
     My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
     According to my bond; no more nor less.
  Lear. How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
     Lest it may mar your fortunes.
  Cor. Good my lord,
     You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me; I
     Return those duties back as are right fit,
     Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
     Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
     They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
     That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
     Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
     Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
     To love my father all.
  Lear. But goes thy heart with this?
  Cor. Ay, good my lord.
  Lear. So young, and so untender?
  Cor. So young, my lord, and true.
  Lear. Let it be so! thy truth then be thy dower!
     For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
     The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
     By all the operation of the orbs
     From whom we do exist and cease to be;
     Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
     Propinquity and property of blood,
     And as a stranger to my heart and me
     Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
     Or he that makes his generation messes
     To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
     Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and reliev'd,
     As thou my sometime daughter.
  Kent. Good my liege-
  Lear. Peace, Kent!
     Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     I lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     On her kind nursery.- Hence and avoid my sight!-
     So be my grave my peace as here I give
     Her father's heart from her! Call France! Who stirs?
     Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
     With my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
     I do invest you jointly in my power,
     Preeminence, and all the large effects
     That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
     With reservation of an hundred knights,
     By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
     The name, and all th' additions to a king. The sway,
     Revenue, execution of the rest,
     Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
     This coronet part betwixt you.
  Kent. Royal Lear,
     Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
     Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
     As my great patron thought on in my prayers-
  Lear. The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.
  Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
     When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
     Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
     When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound
     When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy doom;
     And in thy best consideration check
     This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     Reverbs no hollowness.
  Lear. Kent, on thy life, no more!
  Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn
     To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     Thy safety being the motive.
  Lear. Out of my sight!
  Kent. See better, Lear, and let me still remain
     The true blank of thine eye.
  Lear. Now by Apollo-
  Kent. Now by Apollo, King,
     Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
  Lear. O vassal! miscreant!
                                   [Lays his hand on his sword.]
  Alb., Corn. Dear sir, forbear!
  Kent. Do!
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
     Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
  Lear. Hear me, recreant!
     On thine allegiance, hear me!
     Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow-
     Which we durst never yet- and with strain'd pride
     To come between our sentence and our power,-
     Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,-
     Our potency made good, take thy reward.
     Five days we do allot thee for provision
     To shield thee from diseases of the world,
     And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     Upon our kingdom. If, on the tenth day following,
     Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
     This shall not be revok'd.
  Kent. Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
     Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
     That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [To Regan and Goneril] And your large speeches may your deeds
        approve,
     That good effects may spring from words of love.
     Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
     He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Exit.

  Flourish. Enter Gloucester, with France and Burgundy; Attendants.

  Glou. Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
  Lear. My Lord of Burgundy,
     We first address toward you, who with this king
     Hath rivall'd for our daughter. What in the least
     Will you require in present dower with her,
     Or cease your quest of love?
  Bur. Most royal Majesty,
     I crave no more than hath your Highness offer'd,
     Nor will you tender less.
  Lear. Right noble Burgundy,
     When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
     But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands.
     If aught within that little seeming substance,
     Or all of it, with our displeasure piec'd,
     And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
     She's there, and she is yours.
  Bur. I know no answer.
  Lear. Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
     Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
     Dow'r'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
     Take her, or leave her?
  Bur. Pardon me, royal sir.
     Election makes not up on such conditions.
  Lear. Then leave her, sir; for, by the pow'r that made me,
     I tell you all her wealth. [To France] For you, great King,
     I would not from your love make such a stray
     To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
     T' avert your liking a more worthier way
     Than on a wretch whom nature is asham'd
     Almost t' acknowledge hers.
  France. This is most strange,
     That she that even but now was your best object,
     The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
     Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
     Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
     So many folds of favour. Sure her offence
     Must be of such unnatural degree
     That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection
     Fall'n into taint; which to believe of her
     Must be a faith that reason without miracle
     Should never plant in me.
  Cor. I yet beseech your Majesty,
     If for I want that glib and oily art
     To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,
     I'll do't before I speak- that you make known
     It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
     No unchaste action or dishonoured step,
     That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour;
     But even for want of that for which I am richer-
     A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
     As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
     Hath lost me in your liking.
  Lear. Better thou
     Hadst not been born than not t' have pleas'd me better.
  France. Is it but this- a tardiness in nature
     Which often leaves the history unspoke
     That it intends to do? My Lord of Burgundy,
     What say you to the lady? Love's not love
     When it is mingled with regards that stands
     Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her?
     She is herself a dowry.
  Bur. Royal Lear,
     Give but that portion which yourself propos'd,
     And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
     Duchess of Burgundy.
  Lear. Nothing! I have sworn; I am firm.
  Bur. I am sorry then you have so lost a father
     That you must lose a husband.
  Cor. Peace be with Burgundy!
     Since that respects of fortune are his love,
     I shall not be his wife.
  France. Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
     Most choice, forsaken; and most lov'd, despis'd!
     Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.
     Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
     Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
     My love should kindle to inflam'd respect.
     Thy dow'rless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
     Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
     Not all the dukes in wat'rish Burgundy
     Can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me.
     Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
     Thou losest here, a better where to find.
  Lear. Thou hast her, France; let her be thine; for we
     Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
     That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
     Without our grace, our love, our benison.
     Come, noble Burgundy.
             Flourish. Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, [Cornwall, Albany,
                                    Gloucester, and Attendants].
  France. Bid farewell to your sisters.
  Cor. The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are;
     And, like a sister, am most loath to call
     Your faults as they are nam'd. Use well our father.
     To your professed bosoms I commit him;
     But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
     I would prefer him to a better place!
     So farewell to you both.
  Gon. Prescribe not us our duties.
  Reg. Let your study
     Be to content your lord, who hath receiv'd you
     At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
  Cor. Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides.
     Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
     Well may you prosper!
  France. Come, my fair Cordelia.
                                     Exeunt France and Cordelia.
  Gon. Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
     appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.
  Reg. That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
  Gon. You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we
     have made of it hath not been little. He always lov'd our
     sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her
     off appears too grossly.
  Reg. 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
     known himself.
  Gon. The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
     them.
  Reg. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this
     of Kent's banishment.
  Gon. There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
     him. Pray you let's hit together. If our father carry authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his
     will but offend us.
  Reg. We shall further think on't.
  Gon. We must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
The Earl of Gloucester's Castle.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard solus, [with a letter].

  Edm. Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
     My services are bound. Wherefore should I
     Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
     For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
     Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
     When my dimensions are as well compact,
     My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
     With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     More composition and fierce quality
     Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
     Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
     Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
     As to th' legitimate. Fine word- 'legitimate'!
     Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
     And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
     Shall top th' legitimate. I grow; I prosper.
     Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          Enter Gloucester.

  Glou. Kent banish'd thus? and France in choler parted?
     And the King gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     Confin'd to exhibition? All this done
     Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? What news?
  Edm. So please your lordship, none.
                                           [Puts up the letter.]
  Glou. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  Edm. I know no news, my lord.
  Glou. What paper were you reading?
  Edm. Nothing, my lord.
  Glou. No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your
     pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide
     itself. Let's see. Come, if it be nothing, I shall not need
     spectacles.
  Edm. I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother
     that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much as I have
     perus'd, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
  Glou. Give me the letter, sir.
  Edm. I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as
     in part I understand them, are to blame.
  Glou. Let's see, let's see!
  Edm. I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
     an essay or taste of my virtue.

  Glou. (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd. Come to me, that
     of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'EDGAR.'

     Hum! Conspiracy? 'Sleep till I wak'd him, you should enjoy half
     his revenue.' My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart
     and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
  Edm. It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it. I
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
  Glou. You know the character to be your brother's?
  Edm. If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his;
     but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.
  Glou. It is his.
  Edm. It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
     contents.
  Glou. Hath he never before sounded you in this business?
  Edm. Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
     that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father
     should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
  Glou. O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
     brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I'll apprehend him. Abominable
     villain! Where is he?
  Edm. I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
     your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
     better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
     where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
     purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake
     in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
     for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
  Glou. Think you so?
  Edm. If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall
     hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your
     satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very
     evening.
  Glou. He cannot be such a monster.
  Edm. Nor is not, sure.
  Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
     myself to be in a due resolution.
  Edm. I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I
     shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
  Glou. These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. Love cools,
     friendship falls off, brothers divide. In cities, mutinies; in
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the King falls from bias
     of nature; there's father against child. We have seen the best
     of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.                       Exit.
  Edm. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
     drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
     planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
     thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whore-master man, to lay
     his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father
     compounded with my mother under the Dragon's Tail, and my
     nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and
     lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.
     Edgar-

                             Enter Edgar.

     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
     O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
  Edg. How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation are you
     in?
  Edm. I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  Edg. Do you busy yourself with that?
  Edm. I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as
     of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
     dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state,
     menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless
     diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,
     nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
  Edg. How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
  Edm. Come, come! When saw you my father last?
  Edg. The night gone by.
  Edm. Spake you with him?
  Edg. Ay, two hours together.
  Edm. Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by
     word or countenance
  Edg. None at all.
  Edm. Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my
     entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
     qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
     rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
     scarcely allay.
  Edg. Some villain hath done me wrong.
  Edm. That's my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till
     the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me
     to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my
     lord speak. Pray ye, go! There's my key. If you do stir abroad,
     go arm'd.
  Edg. Arm'd, brother?
  Edm. Brother, I advise you to the best. Go arm'd. I am no honest man
     if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     horror of it. Pray you, away!
  Edg. Shall I hear from you anon?
  Edm. I do serve you in this business.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     A credulous father! and a brother noble,
     Whose nature is so far from doing harms
     That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
     My practices ride easy! I see the business.
     Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
     All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
Exit.




Scene III.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Goneril and [her] Steward [Oswald].

  Gon. Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  Osw. Ay, madam.
  Gon. By day and night, he wrongs me! Every hour
     He flashes into one gross crime or other
     That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
     His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
     On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
     I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.
     If you come slack of former services,
     You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
                                                 [Horns within.]
  Osw. He's coming, madam; I hear him.
  Gon. Put on what weary negligence you please,
     You and your fellows. I'd have it come to question.
     If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
     Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
     Not to be overrul'd. Idle old man,
     That still would manage those authorities
     That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
     Old fools are babes again, and must be us'd
     With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
     Remember what I have said.
  Osw. Very well, madam.
  Gon. And let his knights have colder looks among you.
     What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
     I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
     That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
     To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Kent, [disguised].

  Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow,
     That can my speech defuse, my good intent
     May carry through itself to that full issue
     For which I raz'd my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
     If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
     So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
     Shall find thee full of labours.

         Horns within. Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.

  Lear. Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. [Exit
