     an Attendant.] How now? What art thou?
  Kent. A man, sir.
  Lear. What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
  Kent. I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear
     judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
  Lear. What art thou?
  Kent. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
  Lear. If thou be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou
     art poor enough. What wouldst thou?
  Kent. Service.
  Lear. Who wouldst thou serve?
  Kent. You.
  Lear. Dost thou know me, fellow?
  Kent. No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
     fain call master.
  Lear. What's that?
  Kent. Authority.
  Lear. What services canst thou do?
  Kent. I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
     telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
     ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
     is diligence.
  Lear. How old art thou?
  Kent. Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to
     dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.
  Lear. Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after
     dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner!
     Where's my knave? my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

                                            [Exit an attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
  Osw. So please you-                                      Exit.
  Lear. What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
     [Exit a Knight.] Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's
     asleep.

                            [Enter Knight]

     How now? Where's that mongrel?
  Knight. He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
  Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I call'd him?
  Knight. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
  Lear. He would not?
  Knight. My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgment
     your Highness is not entertain'd with that ceremonious affection
     as you were wont. There's a great abatement of kindness appears
     as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also
     and your daughter.
  Lear. Ha! say'st thou so?
  Knight. I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for
     my duty cannot be silent when I think your Highness wrong'd.
  Lear. Thou but rememb'rest me of mine own conception. I have
     perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather
     blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence
     and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into't. But
     where's my fool? I have not seen him this two days.
  Knight. Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool
     hath much pined away.
  Lear. No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you and tell my
     daughter I would speak with her. [Exit Knight.] Go you, call
     hither my fool.
                                            [Exit an Attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     O, you, sir, you! Come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
  Osw. My lady's father.
  Lear. 'My lady's father'? My lord's knave! You whoreson dog! you
     slave! you cur!
  Osw. I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
  Lear. Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
                                                  [Strikes him.]
  Osw. I'll not be strucken, my lord.
  Kent. Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                            [Trips up his heels.
  Lear. I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv'st me, and I'll love thee.
  Kent. Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences. Away,
     away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
     away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
                                               [Pushes him out.]
  Lear. Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee. There's earnest of thy
     service.                                     [Gives money.]

                             Enter Fool.

  Fool. Let me hire him too. Here's my coxcomb.
                                          [Offers Kent his cap.]
  Lear. How now, my pretty knave? How dost thou?
  Fool. Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. Why? For taking one's part that's out of favour. Nay, an thou
     canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly.
     There, take my coxcomb! Why, this fellow hath banish'd two on's
     daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If
     thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- How now,
     nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
  Lear. Why, my boy?
  Fool. If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
     There's mine! beg another of thy daughters.
  Lear. Take heed, sirrah- the whip.
  Fool. Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd out, when
     Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
  Lear. A pestilent gall to me!
  Fool. Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
  Lear. Do.
  Fool. Mark it, nuncle.
          Have more than thou showest,
          Speak less than thou knowest,
          Lend less than thou owest,
          Ride more than thou goest,
          Learn more than thou trowest,
          Set less than thou throwest;
          Leave thy drink and thy whore,
          And keep in-a-door,
          And thou shalt have more
          Than two tens to a score.
  Kent. This is nothing, fool.
  Fool. Then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me
     nothing for't. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
  Lear. Why, no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.
  Fool. [to Kent] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
     comes to. He will not believe a fool.
  Lear. A bitter fool!
  Fool. Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet fool?
  Lear. No, lad; teach me.
  Fool.   That lord that counsell'd thee
            To give away thy land,
          Come place him here by me-
            Do thou for him stand.
          The sweet and bitter fool
            Will presently appear;
          The one in motley here,
            The other found out there.
  Lear. Dost thou call me fool, boy?
  Fool. All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
     born with.
  Kent. This is not altogether fool, my lord.
  Fool. No, faith; lords and great men will not let me. If I had a
     monopoly out, they would have part on't. And ladies too, they
     will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be
     snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two
     crowns.
  Lear. What two crowns shall they be?
  Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the
     meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i'
     th' middle and gav'st away both parts, thou bor'st thine ass on
     thy back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
     when thou gav'st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
     this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so.

     [Sings]    Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
                  For wise men are grown foppish;
                They know not how their wits to wear,
                  Their manners are so apish.

  Lear. When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
  Fool. I have us'd it, nuncle, ever since thou mad'st thy daughters
     thy mother; for when thou gav'st them the rod, and put'st down
     thine own breeches,

     [Sings]    Then they for sudden joy did weep,
                  And I for sorrow sung,
                That such a king should play bo-peep
                  And go the fools among.

     Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
     lie. I would fain learn to lie.
  Lear. An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipp'd.
  Fool. I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They'll have me
     whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying;
     and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace. I had rather be
     any kind o' thing than a fool! And yet I would not be thee,
     nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing
     i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.

                            Enter Goneril.

  Lear. How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
     are too much o' late i' th' frown.
  Fool. Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for
     her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better
     than thou art now: I am a fool, thou art nothing.
     [To Goneril] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face
     bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum!

            He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
            Weary of all, shall want some.-

     [Points at Lear] That's a sheal'd peascod.
  Gon. Not only, sir, this your all-licens'd fool,
     But other of your insolent retinue
     Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
     In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
     I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
     To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
     By what yourself, too, late have spoke and done,
     That you protect this course, and put it on
     By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
     Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
     Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
     Might in their working do you that offence
     Which else were shame, that then necessity
     Must call discreet proceeding.
  Fool. For you know, nuncle,

          The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
          That it had it head bit off by it young.

     So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
  Lear. Are you our daughter?
  Gon. Come, sir,
     I would you would make use of that good wisdom
     Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
     These dispositions that of late transform you
     From what you rightly are.
  Fool. May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
     Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
  Lear. Doth any here know me? This is not Lear.
     Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
     Either his notion weakens, his discernings
     Are lethargied- Ha! waking? 'Tis not so!
     Who is it that can tell me who I am?
  Fool. Lear's shadow.
  Lear. I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty,
     Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
     I had daughters.
  Fool. Which they will make an obedient father.
  Lear. Your name, fair gentlewoman?
  Gon. This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour
     Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
     To understand my purposes aright.
     As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
     Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
     Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd, and bold
     That this our court, infected with their manners,
     Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
     Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
     Than a grac'd palace. The shame itself doth speak
     For instant remedy. Be then desir'd
     By her that else will take the thing she begs
     A little to disquantity your train,
     And the remainder that shall still depend
     To be such men as may besort your age,
     Which know themselves, and you.
  Lear. Darkness and devils!
     Saddle my horses! Call my train together!
     Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
     Yet have I left a daughter.
  Gon. You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
     Make servants of their betters.

                            Enter Albany.

  Lear. Woe that too late repents!- O, sir, are you come?
     Is it your will? Speak, sir!- Prepare my horses.
     Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
     More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
     Than the sea-monster!
  Alb. Pray, sir, be patient.
  Lear. [to Goneril] Detested kite, thou liest!
     My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
     That all particulars of duty know
     And in the most exact regard support
     The worships of their name.- O most small fault,
     How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
     Which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
     From the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
     Beat at this gate that let thy folly in  [Strikes his head.]
     And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
  Alb. My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
     Of what hath mov'd you.
  Lear. It may be so, my lord.
     Hear, Nature, hear! dear goddess, hear!
     Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
     To make this creature fruitful.
     Into her womb convey sterility;
     Dry up in her the organs of increase;
     And from her derogate body never spring
     A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
     Create her child of spleen, that it may live
     And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.
     Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
     With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
     Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
     To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
     How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
     To have a thankless child! Away, away!                Exit.
  Alb. Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
  Gon. Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
     But let his disposition have that scope
     That dotage gives it.

                             Enter Lear.

  Lear. What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
     Within a fortnight?
  Alb. What's the matter, sir?
  Lear. I'll tell thee. [To Goneril] Life and death! I am asham'd
     That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
     That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
     Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     Pierce every sense about thee!- Old fond eyes,
     Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
     And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     To temper clay. Yea, is it come to this?
     Let it be so. Yet have I left a daughter,
     Who I am sure is kind and comfortable.
     When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
     That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.
                            Exeunt [Lear, Kent, and Attendants].
  Gon. Do you mark that, my lord?
  Alb. I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
     To the great love I bear you -
  Gon. Pray you, content.- What, Oswald, ho!
     [To the Fool] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master!
  Fool. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry! Take the fool with thee.

          A fox when one has caught her,
          And such a daughter,
          Should sure to the slaughter,
          If my cap would buy a halter.
          So the fool follows after.                       Exit.
  Gon. This man hath had good counsel! A hundred knights?
     'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
     At point a hundred knights; yes, that on every dream,
     Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
     He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
     And hold our lives in mercy.- Oswald, I say!
  Alb. Well, you may fear too far.
  Gon. Safer than trust too far.
     Let me still take away the harms I fear,
     Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
     What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister.
     If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
     When I have show'd th' unfitness-

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     How now, Oswald?
     What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
  Osw. Yes, madam.
  Gon. Take you some company, and away to horse!
     Inform her full of my particular fear,
     And thereto add such reasons of your own
     As may compact it more. Get you gone,
     And hasten your return. [Exit Oswald.] No, no, my lord!
     This milky gentleness and course of yours,
     Though I condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
     You are much more at task for want of wisdom
     Than prais'd for harmful mildness.
  Alb. How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
     Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
  Gon. Nay then-
  Alb. Well, well; th' event.                            Exeunt.




Scene V.
Court before the Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.

  Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
     demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
     shall be there afore you.
  Kent. I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
Exit.
  Fool. If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of
     kibes?
  Lear. Ay, boy.
  Fool. Then I prithee be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
  Lear. Ha, ha, ha!
  Fool. Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
     she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I can tell
     what I can tell.
  Lear. What canst tell, boy?
  Fool. She'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
     canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
     man cannot smell out, 'a may spy into.
  Lear. I did her wrong.
  Fool. Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
  Lear. Why?
  Fool. Why, to put's head in; not to give it away to his daughters,
     and leave his horns without a case.
  Lear. I will forget my nature. So kind a father!- Be my horses
     ready?
  Fool. Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars
     are no moe than seven is a pretty reason.
  Lear. Because they are not eight?
  Fool. Yes indeed. Thou wouldst make a good fool.
  Lear. To tak't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
  Fool. If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being
     old before thy time.
  Lear. How's that?
  Fool. Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
  Lear. O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

                         [Enter a Gentleman.]

     How now? Are the horses ready?
  Gent. Ready, my lord.
  Lear. Come, boy.
  Fool. She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
     Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. Scene I.
A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard and Curan, meeting.

  Edm. Save thee, Curan.
  Cur. And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
     here with him this night.
  Edm. How comes that?
  Cur. Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad- I mean the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  Edm. Not I. Pray you, what are they?
  Cur. Have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two Dukes
     of Cornwall and Albany?
  Edm. Not a word.
  Cur. You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.      Exit.
  Edm. The Duke be here to-night? The better! best!
     This weaves itself perforce into my business.
     My father hath set guard to take my brother;
     And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
     Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!
     Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!

                             Enter Edgar.

     My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
     Intelligence is given where you are hid.
     You have now the good advantage of the night.
     Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
     He's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
     Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
     Advise yourself.
  Edg. I am sure on't, not a word.
  Edm. I hear my father coming. Pardon me!
     In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
     Draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho, here!
     Fly, brother.- Torches, torches!- So farewell.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
     Of my more fierce endeavour. [Stabs his arm.] I have seen
        drunkards
     Do more than this in sport.- Father, father!-
     Stop, stop! No help?

             Enter Gloucester, and Servants with torches.

  Glou. Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
  Edm. Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     To stand 's auspicious mistress.
  Glou. But where is he?
  Edm. Look, sir, I bleed.
  Glou. Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Edm. Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could-
  Glou. Pursue him, ho! Go after.        [Exeunt some Servants].
     By no means what?
  Edm. Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     But that I told him the revenging gods
     'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
     Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
     The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
     Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
     To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
     With his prepared sword he charges home
     My unprovided body, lanch'd mine arm;
     But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
     Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
     Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
     Full suddenly he fled.
  Glou. Let him fly far.
     Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
     And found- dispatch. The noble Duke my master,
     My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night.
     By his authority I will proclaim it
     That he which find, him shall deserve our thanks,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     He that conceals him, death.
  Edm. When I dissuaded him from his intent
     And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
     I threaten'd to discover him. He replied,
     'Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
     If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
     Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
     Make thy words faith'd? No. What I should deny
     (As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
     My very character), I'ld turn it all
     To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice;
     And thou must make a dullard of the world,
     If they not thought the profits of my death
     Were very pregnant and potential spurs
     To make thee seek it.'
  Glou. Strong and fast'ned villain!
     Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
                                                  Tucket within.
     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     May have due note of him, and of my land,
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.

                Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Attendants.

  Corn. How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
     (Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.
  Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
  Glou. O madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  Reg. What, did my father's godson seek your life?
     He whom my father nam'd? Your Edgar?
  Glou. O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Glou. I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad!
  Edm. Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
  Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.
     I have this present evening from my sister
     Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     That, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     I'll not be there.
  Corn. Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
     Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
     A childlike office.
  Edm. 'Twas my duty, sir.
  Glou. He did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
  Corn. Is he pursued?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Corn. If he be taken, he shall never more
     Be fear'd of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
     How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
     Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
     So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
     Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
     You we first seize on.
  Edm. I shall serve you, sir,
     Truly, however else.
  Glou. For him I thank your Grace.
  Corn. You know not why we came to visit you-
  Reg. Thus out of season, threading dark-ey'd night.
     Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
     Wherein we must have use of your advice.
     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Of differences, which I best thought it fit
     To answer from our home. The several messengers
     From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
     Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     Your needful counsel to our business,
     Which craves the instant use.
  Glou. I serve you, madam.
     Your Graces are right welcome.
                                               Exeunt. Flourish.




Scene II.
Before Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.

  Osw. Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
  Kent. Ay.
  Osw. Where may we set our horses?
  Kent. I' th' mire.
  Osw. Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
  Kent. I love thee not.
  Osw. Why then, I care not for thee.
  Kent. If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
     me.
  Osw. Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
  Kent. Fellow, I know thee.
  Osw. What dost thou know me for?
  Kent. A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
     shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
     worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     least syllable of thy addition.
  Osw. Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
  Kent. What a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me!
     Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
     before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you. Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  Osw. Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
  Kent. Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
     take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
     Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
     rascal! Come your ways!
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! help!
  Kent. Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
     Strike!                                        [Beats him.]
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! murther!

      Enter Edmund, with his rapier drawn, Gloucester, Cornwall,
                           Regan, Servants.

  Edm. How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
  Kent. With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
     Come on, young master!
  Glou. Weapons? arms? What's the matter here?
  Corn. Keep peace, upon your lives!
     He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
  Reg. The messengers from our sister and the King
  Corn. What is your difference? Speak.
  Osw. I am scarce in breath, my lord.
  Kent. No marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. You cowardly
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a man?
  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not have
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
  Corn. Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
  Osw. This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spar'd
     At suit of his grey beard-
  Kent. Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
     you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
     beard,' you wagtail?
  Corn. Peace, sirrah!
     You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
  Kent. Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
  Corn. Why art thou angry?
  Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
     A plague upon your epileptic visage!
     Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
     Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain,
     I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
  Corn. What, art thou mad, old fellow?
  Glou. How fell you out? Say that.
  Kent. No contraries hold more antipathy
     Than I and such a knave.
  Corn. Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
  Kent. His countenance likes me not.
  Corn. No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
  Kent. Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
     I have seen better faces in my time
     Than stands on any shoulder that I see
     Before me at this instant.
  Corn. This is some fellow
     Who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
     A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he!
     An honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
     An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
     These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
     Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
     Than twenty silly-ducking observants
     That stretch their duties nicely.
  Kent. Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     On flickering Phoebus' front-
  Corn. What mean'st by this?
  Kent. To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I
     know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguil'd you in a plain
     accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, I will not be,
     though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
  Corn. What was th' offence you gave him?
  Osw. I never gave him any.
     It pleas'd the King his master very late
     To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
     When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
     Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
     And put upon him such a deal of man
     That worthied him, got praises of the King
     For him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
     And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
     Drew on me here again.
  Kent. None of these rogues and cowards
     But Ajax is their fool.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks!
     You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
     We'll teach you-
  Kent. Sir, I am too old to learn.
     Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
     On whose employment I was sent to you.
     You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     Against the grace and person of my master,
     Stocking his messenger.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
     There shall he sit till noon.
  Reg. Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too!
  Kent. Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
     You should not use me so.
  Reg. Sir, being his knave, I will.
  Corn. This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
     Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
                                             Stocks brought out.
  Glou. Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
     His fault is much, and the good King his master
     Will check him for't. Your purpos'd low correction
     Is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     Are punish'd with. The King must take it ill
     That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     Should have him thus restrain'd.
  Corn. I'll answer that.
  Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse,
     To have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     For following her affairs. Put in his legs.-
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.]
     Come, my good lord, away.
                           Exeunt [all but Gloucester and Kent].
  Glou. I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. I'll entreat for thee.
  Kent. Pray do not, sir. I have watch'd and travell'd hard.
     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
     A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
     Give you good morrow!
  Glou. The Duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
Exit.
  Kent. Good King, that must approve the common saw,
     Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
     To the warm sun!
     Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
     That by thy comfortable beams I may
     Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
     But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
     Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     Of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     From this enormous state, seeking to give
     Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
     Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
     This shameful lodging.
     Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                         Sleeps.




Scene III.
The open country.

Enter Edgar.

  Edg. I heard myself proclaim'd,
     And by the happy hollow of a tree
     Escap'd the hunt. No port is free, no place
     That guard and most unusual vigilance
     Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape,
     I will preserve myself; and am bethought
     To take the basest and most poorest shape
     That ever penury, in contempt of man,
     Brought near to beast. My face I'll grime with filth,
     Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,
     And with presented nakedness outface
     The winds and persecutions of the sky.
     The country gives me proof and precedent
     Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     And with this horrible object, from low farms,
     Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     Enforce their charity. 'Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!'
     That's something yet! Edgar I nothing am.             Exit.




Scene IV.
Before Gloucester's Castle; Kent in the stocks.

Enter Lear, Fool, and Gentleman.

  Lear. 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     And not send back my messenger.
  Gent. As I learn'd,
     The night before there was no purpose in them
     Of this remove.
  Kent. Hail to thee, noble master!
  Lear. Ha!
     Mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
  Kent. No, my lord.
  Fool. Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
     head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and men
     by th' legs. When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.
  Lear. What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
     To set thee here?
  Kent. It is both he and she-
     Your son and daughter.
  Lear. No.
  Kent. Yes.
  Lear. No, I say.
  Kent. I say yea.
  Lear. No, no, they would not!
  Kent. Yes, they have.
  Lear. By Jupiter, I swear no!
  Kent. By Juno, I swear ay!
  Lear. They durst not do't;
     They would not, could not do't. 'Tis worse than murther
     To do upon respect such violent outrage.
     Resolve me with all modest haste which way
     Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     Coming from us.
  Kent. My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     From Goneril his mistress salutations;
     Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     Commanded me to follow and attend
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     Being the very fellow which of late
     Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
     Having more man than wit about me, drew.
     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
     Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
     The shame which here it suffers.
  Fool. Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.

          Fathers that wear rags
            Do make their children blind;
          But fathers that bear bags
            Shall see their children kind.
          Fortune, that arrant whore,
          Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.

     But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
     daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
  Lear. O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     Hysterica passio! Down, thou climbing sorrow!
     Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
  Kent. With the Earl, sir, here within.
  Lear. Follow me not;
     Stay here.                                            Exit.
  Gent. Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
  Kent. None.
     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Fool. An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
     thou'dst well deserv'd it.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no
     labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noses are led by
     their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
     but can smell him that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great
     wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
     it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
     When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I
     would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
            And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain
            And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
            And let the wise man fly.
          The knave turns fool that runs away;
            The fool no knave, perdy.
  Kent. Where learn'd you this, fool?
  Fool. Not i' th' stocks, fool.

                      Enter Lear and Gloucester

  Lear. Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
     They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches-
     The images of revolt and flying off!
     Fetch me a better answer.
  Glou. My dear lord,
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     How unremovable and fix'd he is
     In his own course.
  Lear. Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
     I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
  Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
  Lear. Inform'd them? Dost thou understand me, man?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Lear. The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
     Would with his daughter speak, commands her service.
     Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
     Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that-
     No, but not yet! May be he is not well.
     Infirmity doth still neglect all office
     Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves
     When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
     To suffer with the body. I'll forbear;
     And am fallen out with my more headier will,
     To take the indispos'd and sickly fit
     For the sound man.- Death on my state! Wherefore
     Should be sit here? This act persuades me
     That this remotion of the Duke and her
     Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
     Go tell the Duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them-
     Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,
     Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum
     Till it cry sleep to death.
  Glou. I would have all well betwixt you.                 Exit.
  Lear. O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!
  Fool. Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive. She knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs with
     a stick and cried 'Down, wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that,
     in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

             Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.

  Lear. Good morrow to you both.
  Corn. Hail to your Grace!
                                       Kent here set at liberty.
  Reg. I am glad to see your Highness.
  Lear. Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
     I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad,
     I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     Sepulchring an adultress. [To Kent] O, are you free?
     Some other time for that.- Beloved Regan,
     Thy sister's naught. O Regan, she hath tied
     Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here!
                                   [Lays his hand on his heart.]
     I can scarce speak to thee. Thou'lt not believe
     With how deprav'd a quality- O Regan!
  Reg. I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
     You less know how to value her desert
     Than she to scant her duty.
  Lear. Say, how is that?
  Reg. I cannot think my sister in the least
     Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
     She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,
     'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
     As clears her from all blame.
  Lear. My curses on her!
  Reg. O, sir, you are old!
     Nature in you stands on the very verge
     Of her confine. You should be rul'd, and led
     By some discretion that discerns your state
     Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you
     That to our sister you do make return;
     Say you have wrong'd her, sir.
  Lear. Ask her forgiveness?
     Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
     'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.          [Kneels.]
     Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg
     That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
  Reg. Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks.
     Return you to my sister.
  Lear. [rises] Never, Regan!
     She hath abated me of half my train;
     Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
