(Barberini or something of the kind). The fellow was simply a mass of
rings and diamonds--real diamonds, too--and the couple used to drive
out in a marvellous carriage. At first Mlle. Blanche played 'trente et
quarante' with fair success, but, later, her luck took a marked change
for the worse. I distinctly remember that in a single evening she lost
an enormous sum. But worse was to ensue, for one fine morning her
prince disappeared--horses, carriage, and all. Also, the hotel bill
which he left unpaid was enormous. Upon this Mlle. Zelma (the name
which she assumed after figuring as Madame Barberini) was in despair.
She shrieked and howled all over the hotel, and even tore her clothes
in her frenzy. In the hotel there was staying also a Polish count (you
must know that ALL travelling Poles are counts!), and the spectacle of
Mlle. Zelma tearing her clothes and, catlike, scratching her face with
her beautiful, scented nails produced upon him a strong impression. So
the pair had a talk together, and, by luncheon time, she was consoled.
Indeed, that evening the couple entered the Casino arm-in-arm--Mlle.
Zelma laughing loudly, according to her custom, and showing even more
expansiveness in her manners than she had before shown. For instance,
she thrust her way into the file of women roulette-players in the exact
fashion of those ladies who, to clear a space for themselves at the
tables, push their fellow-players roughly aside. Doubtless you have
noticed them?"

"Yes, certainly."

"Well, they are not worth noticing. To the annoyance of the decent
public they are allowed to remain here--at all events such of them as
daily change 4000 franc notes at the tables (though, as soon as ever
these women cease to do so, they receive an invitation to depart).
However, Mlle. Zelma continued to change notes of this kind, but her
play grew more and more unsuccessful, despite the fact that such
ladies' luck is frequently good, for they have a surprising amount of
cash at their disposal. Suddenly, the Count too disappeared, even as
the Prince had done, and that same evening Mlle. Zelma was forced to
appear in the Casino alone. On this occasion no one offered her a
greeting. Two days later she had come to the end of her resources;
whereupon, after staking and losing her last louis d'or she chanced to
look around her, and saw standing by her side the Baron Burmergelm, who
had been eyeing her with fixed disapproval. To his distaste, however,
Mlle. paid no attention, but, turning to him with her well-known smile,
requested him to stake, on her behalf, ten louis on the red. Later that
evening a complaint from the Baroness led the authorities to request
Mlle. not to re-enter the Casino. If you feel in any way surprised that
I should know these petty and unedifying details, the reason is that I
had them from a relative of mine who, later that evening, drove Mlle.
Zelma in his carriage from Roulettenberg to Spa. Now, mark you, Mlle.
wants to become Madame General, in order that, in future, she may be
spared the receipt of such invitations from Casino authorities as she
received three years ago. At present she is not playing; but that is
only because, according to the signs, she is lending money to other
players. Yes, that is a much more paying game. I even suspect that the
unfortunate General is himself in her debt, as well as, perhaps, also
De Griers. Or, it may be that the latter has entered into a partnership
with her. Consequently you yourself will see that, until the marriage
shall have been consummated, Mlle. would scarcely like to have the
attention of the Baron and the Baroness drawn to herself. In short, to
any one in her position, a scandal would be most detrimental. You form
a member of the menage of these people; wherefore, any act of yours
might cause such a scandal--and the more so since daily she appears in
public arm in arm with the General or with Mlle. Polina. NOW do you
understand?"

"No, I do not!" I shouted as I banged my fist down upon the
table--banged it with such violence that a frightened waiter came
running towards us. "Tell me, Mr. Astley, why, if you knew this history
all along, and, consequently, always knew who this Mlle. Blanche is,
you never warned either myself or the General, nor, most of all, Mlle.
Polina" (who is accustomed to appear in the Casino--in public
everywhere with Mlle. Blanche). "How could you do it?"

"It would have done no good to warn you," he replied quietly, "for the
reason that you could have effected nothing. Against what was I to warn
you? As likely as not, the General knows more about Mlle. Blanche even
than I do; yet the unhappy man still walks about with her and Mlle.
Polina. Only yesterday I saw this Frenchwoman riding, splendidly
mounted, with De Griers, while the General was careering in their wake
on a roan horse. He had said, that morning, that his legs were hurting
him, yet his riding-seat was easy enough. As he passed I looked at him,
and the thought occurred to me that he was a man lost for ever.
However, it is no affair of mine, for I have only recently had the
happiness to make Mlle. Polina's acquaintance. Also"--he added this as
an afterthought--"I have already told you that I do not recognise your
right to ask me certain questions, however sincere be my liking for
you."

"Enough," I said, rising. "To me it is as clear as day that Mlle.
Polina knows all about this Mlle. Blanche, but cannot bring herself to
part with her Frenchman; wherefore, she consents also to be seen in
public with Mlle. Blanche. You may be sure that nothing else would ever
have induced her either to walk about with this Frenchwoman or to send
me a note not to touch the Baron. Yes, it is THERE that the influence
lies before which everything in the world must bow! Yet she herself it
was who launched me at the Baron! The devil take it, but I was left no
choice in the matter."

"You forget, in the first place, that this Mlle. de Cominges is the
General's inamorata, and, in the second place, that Mlle. Polina, the
General's step-daughter, has a younger brother and sister who, though
they are the General's own children, are completely neglected by this
madman, and robbed as well."

"Yes, yes; that is so. For me to go and desert the children now would
mean their total abandonment; whereas, if I remain, I should be able to
defend their interests, and, perhaps, to save a moiety of their
property. Yes, yes; that is quite true. And yet, and yet--Oh, I can
well understand why they are all so interested in the General's mother!"

"In whom?" asked Mr. Astley.

"In the old woman of Moscow who declines to die, yet concerning whom
they are for ever expecting telegrams to notify the fact of her death."

"Ah, then of course their interests centre around her. It is a question
of succession. Let that but be settled, and the General will marry,
Mlle. Polina will be set free, and De Griers--"

"Yes, and De Griers?"

"Will be repaid his money, which is what he is now waiting for."

"What? You think that he is waiting for that?"

"I know of nothing else," asserted Mr. Astley doggedly.

"But, I do, I do!" I shouted in my fury. "He is waiting also for the
old woman's will, for the reason that it awards Mlle. Polina a dowry.
As soon as ever the money is received, she will throw herself upon the
Frenchman's neck. All women are like that. Even the proudest of them
become abject slaves where marriage is concerned. What Polina is good
for is to fall head over ears in love. That is MY opinion. Look at
her--especially when she is sitting alone, and plunged in thought. All
this was pre-ordained and foretold, and is accursed. Polina could
perpetrate any mad act. She--she--But who called me by name?" I broke
off. "Who is shouting for me? I heard some one calling in Russian,
'Alexis Ivanovitch!' It was a woman's voice. Listen!"

At the moment, we were approaching my hotel. We had left the cafe long
ago, without even noticing that we had done so.

"Yes, I DID hear a woman's voice calling, but whose I do not know. The
someone was calling you in Russian. Ah! NOW I can see whence the cries
come. They come from that lady there--the one who is sitting on the
settee, the one who has just been escorted to the verandah by a crowd
of lacqueys. Behind her see that pile of luggage! She must have arrived
by train."

"But why should she be calling ME? Hear her calling again! See! She is
beckoning to us!"

"Yes, so she is," assented Mr. Astley.

"Alexis Ivanovitch, Alexis Ivanovitch! Good heavens, what a stupid
fellow!" came in a despairing wail from the verandah.

We had almost reached the portico, and I was just setting foot upon the
space before it, when my hands fell to my sides in limp astonishment,
and my feet glued themselves to the pavement!



IX

For on the topmost tier of the hotel verandah, after being carried up
the steps in an armchair amid a bevy of footmen, maid-servants, and
other menials of the hotel, headed by the landlord (that functionary
had actually run out to meet a visitor who arrived with so much stir
and din, attended by her own retinue, and accompanied by so great a
pile of trunks and portmanteaux)--on the topmost tier of the verandah,
I say, there was sitting--THE GRANDMOTHER! Yes, it was she--rich, and
imposing, and seventy-five years of age--Antonida Vassilievna
Tarassevitcha, landowner and grande dame of Moscow--the "La Baboulenka"
who had caused so many telegrams to be sent off and received--who had
been dying, yet not dying--who had, in her own person, descended upon
us even as snow might fall from the clouds! Though unable to walk, she
had arrived borne aloft in an armchair (her mode of conveyance for the
last five years), as brisk, aggressive, self-satisfied, bolt-upright,
loudly imperious, and generally abusive as ever. In fact, she looked
exactly as she had on the only two occasions when I had seen her since
my appointment to the General's household.  Naturally enough, I stood
petrified with astonishment. She had sighted me a hundred paces off!
Even while she was being carried along in her chair she had recognised
me, and called me by name and surname (which, as usual, after hearing
once, she had remembered ever afterwards).

"And this is the woman whom they had thought to see in her grave after
making her will!" I thought to myself. "Yet she will outlive us, and
every one else in the hotel. Good Lord! what is going to become of us
now? What on earth is to happen to the General? She will turn the place
upside down!"

"My good sir," the old woman continued in a stentorian voice, "what are
you standing THERE for, with your eyes almost falling out of your head?
Cannot you come and say how-do-you-do? Are you too proud to shake
hands? Or do you not recognise me? Here, Potapitch!" she cried to an
old servant who, dressed in a frock coat and white waistcoat, had a
bald, red head (he was the chamberlain who always accompanied her on
her journeys). "Just think! Alexis Ivanovitch does not recognise me!
They have buried me for good and all! Yes, and after sending hosts of
telegrams to know if I were dead or not! Yes, yes, I have heard the
whole story. I am very much alive, though, as you may see."

"Pardon me, Antonida Vassilievna," I replied good humouredly as I
recovered my presence of mind. "I have no reason to wish you ill. I am
merely rather astonished to see you. Why should I not be so, seeing how
unexpected--"

"WHY should you be astonished? I just got into my chair, and came.
Things are quiet enough in the train, for there is no one there to
chatter. Have you been out for a walk?"

"Yes. I have just been to the Casino."

"Oh? Well, it is quite nice here," she went on as she looked about her.
"The place seems comfortable, and all the trees are out. I like it very
well. Are your people at home? Is the General, for instance, indoors?"

"Yes; and probably all of them."

"Do they observe the convenances, and keep up appearances? Such things
always give one tone. I have heard that they are keeping a carriage,
even as Russian gentlefolks ought to do. When abroad, our Russian
people always cut a dash. Is Prascovia here too?"

"Yes. Polina Alexandrovna is here."

"And the Frenchwoman? However, I will go and look for them myself. Tell
me the nearest way to their rooms. Do you like being here?"

"Yes, I thank you, Antonida Vassilievna."

"And you, Potapitch, you go and tell that fool of a landlord to reserve
me a suitable suite of rooms. They must be handsomely decorated, and
not too high up. Have my luggage taken up to them. But what are you
tumbling over yourselves for? Why are you all tearing about? What
scullions these fellows are!--Who is that with you?" she added to
myself.

"A Mr. Astley," I replied.

"And who is Mr. Astley?"

"A fellow-traveller, and my very good friend, as well as an
acquaintance of the General's."

"Oh, an Englishman? Then that is why he stared at me without even
opening his lips. However, I like Englishmen. Now, take me upstairs,
direct to their rooms. Where are they lodging?"

Madame was lifted up in her chair by the lacqueys, and I preceded her
up the grand staircase. Our progress was exceedingly effective, for
everyone whom we met stopped to stare at the cortege. It happened that
the hotel had the reputation of being the best, the most expensive, and
the most aristocratic in all the spa, and at every turn on the
staircase or in the corridors we encountered fine ladies and
important-looking Englishmen--more than one of whom hastened downstairs
to inquire of the awestruck landlord who the newcomer was. To all such
questions he returned the same answer--namely, that the old lady was an
influential foreigner, a Russian, a Countess, and a grande dame, and
that she had taken the suite which, during the previous week, had been
tenanted by the Grande Duchesse de N.

Meanwhile the cause of the sensation--the Grandmother--was being borne
aloft in her armchair. Every person whom she met she scanned with an
inquisitive eye, after first of all interrogating me about him or her
at the top of her voice. She was stout of figure, and, though she could
not leave her chair, one felt, the moment that one first looked at her,
that she was also tall of stature. Her back was as straight as a board,
and never did she lean back in her seat. Also, her large grey head,
with its keen, rugged features, remained always erect as she glanced
about her in an imperious, challenging sort of way, with looks and
gestures that clearly were unstudied. Though she had reached her
seventy-sixth year, her face was still fresh, and her teeth had not
decayed. Lastly, she was dressed in a black silk gown and white mobcap.

"She interests me tremendously," whispered Mr. Astley as, still
smoking, he walked by my side. Meanwhile I was reflecting that probably
the old lady knew all about the telegrams, and even about De Griers,
though little or nothing about Mlle. Blanche. I said as much to Mr.
Astley.

But what a frail creature is man! No sooner was my first surprise
abated than I found myself rejoicing in the shock which we were about
to administer to the General. So much did the thought inspire me that I
marched ahead in the gayest of fashions.

Our party was lodging on the third floor. Without knocking at the door,
or in any way announcing our presence, I threw open the portals, and
the Grandmother was borne through them in triumph. As though of set
purpose, the whole party chanced at that moment to be assembled in the
General's study. The time was eleven o'clock, and it seemed that an
outing of some sort (at which a portion of the party were to drive in
carriages, and others to ride on horseback, accompanied by one or two
extraneous acquaintances) was being planned. The General was present,
and also Polina, the children, the latter's nurses, De Griers, Mlle.
Blanche (attired in a riding-habit), her mother, the young Prince, and
a learned German whom I beheld for the first time. Into the midst of
this assembly the lacqueys conveyed Madame in her chair, and set her
down within three paces of the General!

Good heavens! Never shall I forget the spectacle which ensued! Just
before our entry, the General had been holding forth to the company,
with De Griers in support of him. I may also mention that, for the last
two or three days, Mlle. Blanche and De Griers had been making a great
deal of the young Prince, under the very nose of the poor General. In
short, the company, though decorous and conventional, was in a gay,
familiar mood. But no sooner did the Grandmother appear than the
General stopped dead in the middle of a word, and, with jaw dropping,
stared hard at the old lady--his eyes almost starting out of his head,
and his expression as spellbound as though he had just seen a basilisk.
In return, the Grandmother stared at him silently and without
moving--though with a look of mingled challenge, triumph, and ridicule
in her eyes. For ten seconds did the pair remain thus eyeing one
another, amid the profound silence of the company; and even De Griers
sat petrified--an extraordinary look of uneasiness dawning on his face.
As for Mlle. Blanche, she too stared wildly at the Grandmother, with
eyebrows raised and her lips parted--while the Prince and the German
savant contemplated the tableau in profound amazement. Only Polina
looked anything but perplexed or surprised. Presently, however, she too
turned as white as a sheet, and then reddened to her temples. Truly the
Grandmother's arrival seemed to be a catastrophe for everybody! For my
own part, I stood looking from the Grandmother to the company, and back
again, while Mr. Astley, as usual, remained in the background, and
gazed calmly and decorously at the scene.

"Well, here I am--and instead of a telegram, too!" the Grandmother at
last ejaculated, to dissipate the silence. "What? You were not
expecting me?"

"Antonida Vassilievna! O my dearest mother! But how on earth did you,
did you--?" The mutterings of the unhappy General died away.

I verily believe that if the Grandmother had held her tongue a few
seconds longer she would have had a stroke.

"How on earth did I WHAT?" she exclaimed. "Why, I just got into the
train and came here. What else is the railway meant for? But you
thought that I had turned up my toes and left my property to the lot of
you. Oh, I know ALL about the telegrams which you have been
dispatching. They must have cost you a pretty sum, I should think, for
telegrams are not sent from abroad for nothing. Well, I picked up my
heels, and came here. Who is this Frenchman? Monsieur de Griers, I
suppose?"

"Oui, madame," assented De Griers. "Et, croyez, je suis si enchante!
Votre sante--c'est un miracle vous voir ici. Une surprise charmante!"

"Just so. 'Charmante!' I happen to know you as a mountebank, and
therefore trust you no more than THIS." She indicated her little
finger. "And who is THAT?" she went on, turning towards Mlle. Blanche.
Evidently the Frenchwoman looked so becoming in her riding-habit, with
her whip in her hand, that she had made an impression upon the old
lady. "Who is that woman there?"

"Mlle. de Cominges," I said. "And this is her mother, Madame de
Cominges. They also are staying in the hotel."

"Is the daughter married?" asked the old lady, without the least
semblance of ceremony.

"No," I replied as respectfully as possible, but under my breath.

"Is she good company?"

I failed to understand the question.

"I mean, is she or is she not a bore? Can she speak Russian? When this
De Griers was in Moscow he soon learnt to make himself understood."

I explained to the old lady that Mlle. Blanche had never visited Russia.

"Bonjour, then," said Madame, with sudden brusquerie.

"Bonjour, madame," replied Mlle. Blanche with an elegant, ceremonious
bow as, under cover of an unwonted modesty, she endeavoured to express,
both in face and figure, her extreme surprise at such strange behaviour
on the part of the Grandmother.

"How the woman sticks out her eyes at me! How she mows and minces!" was
the Grandmother's comment. Then she turned suddenly to the General, and
continued: "I have taken up my abode here, so am going to be your
next-door neighbour. Are you glad to hear that, or are you not?"

"My dear mother, believe me when I say that I am sincerely delighted,"
returned the General, who had now, to a certain extent, recovered his
senses; and inasmuch as, when occasion arose, he could speak with
fluency, gravity, and a certain effect, he set himself to be expansive
in his remarks, and went on: "We have been so dismayed and upset by the
news of your indisposition! We had received such hopeless telegrams
about you! Then suddenly--"

"Fibs, fibs!" interrupted the Grandmother.

"How on earth, too, did you come to decide upon the journey?" continued
the General, with raised voice as he hurried to overlook the old lady's
last remark. "Surely, at your age, and in your present state of health,
the thing is so unexpected that our surprise is at least intelligible.
However, I am glad to see you (as indeed, are we all"--he said this
with a dignified, yet conciliatory, smile), "and will use my best
endeavours to render your stay here as pleasant as possible."

"Enough! All this is empty chatter. You are talking the usual nonsense.
I shall know quite well how to spend my time. How did I come to
undertake the journey, you ask? Well, is there anything so very
surprising about it? It was done quite simply. What is every one going
into ecstasies about?--How do you do, Prascovia? What are YOU doing
here?"

"And how are YOU, Grandmother?" replied Polina, as she approached the
old lady. "Were you long on the journey?"

"The most sensible question that I have yet been asked! Well, you shall
hear for yourself how it all happened. I lay and lay, and was doctored
and doctored, until at last I drove the physicians from me, and called
in an apothecary from Nicolai who had cured an old woman of a malady
similar to my own--cured her merely with a little hayseed. Well, he did
me a great deal of good, for on the third day I broke into a sweat, and
was able to leave my bed. Then my German doctors held another
consultation, put on their spectacles, and told me that if I would go
abroad, and take a course of the waters, the indisposition would
finally pass away. 'Why should it not?' I thought to myself. So I had
got things ready, and on the following day, a Friday, set out for here.
I occupied a special compartment in the train, and where ever I had to
change I found at the station bearers who were ready to carry me for a
few coppers. You have nice quarters here," she went on as she glanced
around the room. "But where on earth did you get the money for them, my
good sir? I thought that everything of yours had been mortgaged? This
Frenchman alone must be your creditor for a good deal. Oh, I know all
about it, all about it."

"I-I am surprised at you, my dearest mother," said the General in some
confusion. "I-I am greatly surprised. But I do not need any extraneous
control of my finances. Moreover, my expenses do not exceed my income,
and we--"

"They do not exceed it? Fie! Why, you are robbing your children of
their last kopeck--you, their guardian!"

"After this," said the General, completely taken aback, "--after what
you have just said, I do not know whether--"

"You do not know what? By heavens, are you never going to drop that
roulette of yours? Are you going to whistle all your property away?"

This made such an impression upon the General that he almost choked
with fury.

"Roulette, indeed? I play roulette? Really, in view of my
position--Recollect what you are saying, my dearest mother. You must
still be unwell."

"Rubbish, rubbish!" she retorted. "The truth is that you CANNOT be got
away from that roulette. You are simply telling lies. This very day I
mean to go and see for myself what roulette is like. Prascovia, tell me
what there is to be seen here; and do you, Alexis Ivanovitch, show me
everything; and do you, Potapitch, make me a list of excursions. What
IS there to be seen?" again she inquired of Polina.

"There is a ruined castle, and the Shlangenberg."

"The Shlangenberg? What is it? A forest?"

"No, a mountain on the summit of which there is a place fenced off.
From it you can get a most beautiful view."

"Could a chair be carried up that mountain of yours?"

"Doubtless we could find bearers for the purpose," I interposed.

At this moment Theodosia, the nursemaid, approached the old lady with
the General's children.

"No, I DON'T want to see them," said the Grandmother. "I hate kissing
children, for their noses are always wet. How are you getting on,
Theodosia?"

"I am very well, thank you, Madame," replied the nursemaid. "And how is
your ladyship? We have been feeling so anxious about you!"

"Yes, I know, you simple soul--But who are those other guests?" the old
lady continued, turning again to Polina. "For instance, who is that old
rascal in the spectacles?"

"Prince Nilski, Grandmamma," whispered Polina.

"Oh, a Russian? Why, I had no idea that he could understand me! Surely
he did not hear what I said? As for Mr. Astley, I have seen him
already, and I see that he is here again. How do you do?" she added to
the gentleman in question.

Mr. Astley bowed in silence.

"Have you NOTHING to say to me?" the old lady went on. "Say something,
for goodness' sake! Translate to him, Polina."

Polina did so.

"I have only to say," replied Mr. Astley gravely, but also with
alacrity, "that I am indeed glad to see you in such good health." This
was interpreted to the Grandmother, and she seemed much gratified.

"How well English people know how to answer one!" she remarked. "That
is why I like them so much better than French. Come here," she added to
Mr. Astley. "I will try not to bore you too much. Polina, translate to
him that I am staying in rooms on a lower floor. Yes, on a lower
floor," she repeated to Astley, pointing downwards with her finger.

Astley looked pleased at receiving the invitation.

Next, the old lady scanned Polina, from head to foot with minute
attention.

"I could almost have liked you, Prascovia," suddenly she remarked, "for
you are a nice girl--the best of the lot. You have some character about
you. I too have character. Turn round. Surely that is not false hair
that you are wearing?"

"No, Grandmamma. It is my own."

"Well, well. I do not like the stupid fashions of today. You are very
good looking. I should have fallen in love with you if I had been a
man. Why do you not get married? It is time now that I was going. I
want to walk, yet I always have to ride. Are you still in a bad
temper?" she added to the General.

"No, indeed," rejoined the now mollified General.

"I quite understand that at your time of life--"

"Cette vieille est tombee en enfance," De Griers whispered to me.

"But I want to look round a little," the old lady added to the General.
Will you lend me Alexis Ivanovitch for the purpose?

"As much as you like. But I myself--yes, and Polina and Monsieur de
Griers too--we all of us hope to have the pleasure of escorting you."

"Mais, madame, cela sera un plaisir," De Griers commented with a
bewitching smile.

"'Plaisir' indeed! Why, I look upon you as a perfect fool, monsieur."
Then she remarked to the General: "I am not going to let you have any
of my money. I must be off to my rooms now, to see what they are like.
Afterwards we will look round a little. Lift me up."

Again the Grandmother was borne aloft and carried down the staircase
amid a perfect bevy of followers--the General walking as though he had
been hit over the head with a cudgel, and De Griers seeming to be
plunged in thought. Endeavouring to be left behind, Mlle. Blanche next
thought better of it, and followed the rest, with the Prince in her
wake. Only the German savant and Madame de Cominges did not leave the
General's apartments.



X

At spas--and, probably, all over Europe--hotel landlords and managers
are guided in their allotment of rooms to visitors, not so much by the
wishes and requirements of those visitors, as by their personal
estimate of the same. It may also be said that these landlords and
managers seldom make a mistake. To the Grandmother, however, our
landlord, for some reason or another, allotted such a sumptuous suite
that he fairly overreached himself; for he assigned her a suite
consisting of four magnificently appointed rooms, with bathroom,
servants' quarters, a separate room for her maid, and so on. In fact,
during the previous week the suite had been occupied by no less a
personage than a Grand Duchess: which circumstance was duly explained
to the new occupant, as an excuse for raising the price of these
apartments. The Grandmother had herself carried--or, rather,
wheeled--through each room in turn, in order that she might subject the
whole to a close and attentive scrutiny; while the landlord--an
elderly, bald-headed man--walked respectfully by her side.

What every one took the Grandmother to be I do not know, but it
appeared, at least, that she was accounted a person not only of great
importance, but also, and still more, of great wealth; and without
delay they entered her in the hotel register as "Madame la Generale,
Princesse de Tarassevitcheva," although she had never been a princess
in her life. Her retinue, her reserved compartment in the train, her
pile of unnecessary trunks, portmanteaux, and strong-boxes, all helped
to increase her prestige; while her wheeled chair, her sharp tone and
voice, her eccentric questions (put with an air of the most overbearing
and unbridled imperiousness), her whole figure--upright, rugged, and
commanding as it was--completed the general awe in which she was held.
As she inspected her new abode she ordered her chair to be stopped at
intervals in order that, with finger extended towards some article of
furniture, she might ply the respectfully smiling, yet secretly
apprehensive, landlord with unexpected questions. She addressed them to
him in French, although her pronunciation of the language was so bad
that sometimes I had to translate them. For the most part, the
landlord's answers were unsatisfactory, and failed to please her; nor
were the questions themselves of a practical nature, but related,
generally, to God knows what.

For instance, on one occasion she halted before a picture which, a poor
copy of a well-known original, had a mythological subject.

"Of whom is this a portrait?" she inquired.

The landlord explained that it was probably that of a countess.

"But how know you that?" the old lady retorted.

"You live here, yet you cannot say for certain! And why is the picture
there at all? And why do its eyes look so crooked?"

To all these questions the landlord could return no satisfactory reply,
despite his floundering endeavours.

"The blockhead!" exclaimed the Grandmother in Russian.

Then she proceeded on her way--only to repeat the same story in front
of a Saxon statuette which she had sighted from afar, and had
commanded, for some reason or another, to be brought to her. Finally,
she inquired of the landlord what was the value of the carpet in her
bedroom, as well as where the said carpet had been manufactured; but,
the landlord could do no more than promise to make inquiries.

"What donkeys these people are!" she commented. Next, she turned her
attention to the bed.

"What a huge counterpane!" she exclaimed. "Turn it back, please." The
lacqueys did so.

"Further yet, further yet," the old lady cried. "Turn it RIGHT back.
Also, take off those pillows and bolsters, and lift up the feather bed."

The bed was opened for her inspection.

"Mercifully it contains no bugs," she remarked.

"Pull off the whole thing, and then put on my own pillows and sheets.
The place is too luxurious for an old woman like myself. It is too
large for any one person. Alexis Ivanovitch, come and see me whenever
you are not teaching your pupils."

"After tomorrow I shall no longer be in the General's service," I
replied, "but merely living in the hotel on my own account."

"Why so?"

"Because, the other day, there arrived from Berlin a German and his
wife--persons of some importance; and, it chanced that, when taking a
walk, I spoke to them in German without having properly compassed the
Berlin accent."

"Indeed?"

"Yes: and this action on my part the Baron held to be an insult, and
complained about it to the General, who yesterday dismissed me from his
employ."

"But I suppose you must have threatened that precious Baron, or
something of the kind? However, even if you did so, it was a matter of
no moment."

"No, I did not. The Baron was the aggressor by raising his stick at me."

Upon that the Grandmother turned sharply to the General.

"What? You permitted yourself to treat your tutor thus, you nincompoop,
and to dismiss him from his post? You are a blockhead--an utter
blockhead! I can see that clearly."

"Do not alarm yourself, my dear mother," the General replied with a
lofty air--an air in which there was also a tinge of familiarity. "I am
quite capable of managing my own affairs. Moreover, Alexis Ivanovitch
has not given you a true account of the matter."

"What did you do next?" The old lady inquired of me.

"I wanted to challenge the Baron to a duel," I replied as modestly as
possible; "but the General protested against my doing so."

"And WHY did you so protest?" she inquired of the General. Then she
turned to the landlord, and questioned him as to whether HE would not
have fought a duel, if challenged. "For," she added, "I can see no
difference between you and the Baron; nor can I bear that German visage
of yours." Upon this the landlord bowed and departed, though he could
not have understood the Grandmother's compliment.

"Pardon me, Madame," the General continued with a sneer, "but are duels
really feasible?"

"Why not? All men are crowing cocks, and that is why they quarrel. YOU,
though, I perceive, are a blockhead--a man who does not even know how
to carry his breeding. Lift me up. Potapitch, see to it that you always
have TWO bearers ready. Go and arrange for their hire. But we shall not
require more than two, for I shall need only to be carried upstairs. On
the level or in the street I can be WHEELED along. Go and tell them
that, and pay them in advance, so that they may show me some respect.
You too, Potapitch, are always to come with me, and YOU, Alexis
Ivanovitch, are to point out to me this Baron as we go along, in order
that I may get a squint at the precious 'Von.' And where is that
roulette played?"

I explained to her that the game was carried on in the salons of the
Casino; whereupon there ensued a string of questions as to whether
there were many such salons, whether many people played in them,
whether those people played a whole day at a time, and whether the game
was managed according to fixed rules. At length, I thought it best to
say that the most advisable course would be for her to go and see it
for herself, since a mere description of it would be a difficult matter.

"Then take me straight there," she said, "and do you walk on in front
of me, Alexis Ivanovitch."

"What, mother? Before you have so much as rested from your journey?"
the General inquired with some solicitude. Also, for some reason which
I could not divine, he seemed to be growing nervous; and, indeed, the
whole party was evincing signs of confusion, and exchanging glances
with one another. Probably they were thinking that it would be a
ticklish--even an embarrassing--business to accompany the Grandmother
to the Casino, where, very likely, she would perpetrate further
eccentricities, and in public too! Yet on their own initiative they had
offered to escort her!

"Why should I rest?" she retorted. "I am not tired, for I have been
sitting still these past five days. Let us see what your medicinal
springs and waters are like, and where they are situated. What, too,
about that, that--what did you call it, Prascovia?--oh, about that
mountain top?"

"Yes, we are going to see it, Grandmamma."

"Very well. Is there anything else for me to see here?"

"Yes! Quite a number of things," Polina forced herself to say.

"Martha, YOU must come with me as well," went on the old lady to her
maid.

"No, no, mother!" ejaculated the General. "Really she cannot come. They
would not admit even Potapitch to the Casino."

"Rubbish! Because she is my servant, is that a reason for turning her
out? Why, she is only a human being like the rest of us; and as she has
been travelling for a week she might like to look about her. With whom
else could she go out but myself? She would never dare to show her nose
in the street alone."

"But, mother--"

"Are you ashamed to be seen with me? Stop at home, then, and you will
be asked no questions. A pretty General YOU are, to be sure! I am a
general's widow myself. But, after all, why should I drag the whole
party with me? I will go and see the sights with only Alexis Ivanovitch
as my escort."

De Griers strongly insisted that EVERY ONE ought to accompany her.
Indeed, he launched out into a perfect shower of charming phrases
concerning the pleasure of acting as her cicerone, and so forth. Every
one was touched with his words.

"Mais elle est tombee en enfance," he added aside to the General.
"Seule, elle fera des betises." More than this I could not overhear,
but he seemed to have got some plan in his mind, or even to be feeling
a slight return of his hopes.

The distance to the Casino was about half a verst, and our route led us
through the Chestnut Avenue until we reached the square directly
fronting the building. The General, I could see, was a trifle reassured
by the fact that, though our progress was distinctly eccentric in its
nature, it was, at least, correct and orderly. As a matter of fact, the
spectacle of a person who is unable to walk is not anything to excite
surprise at a spa. Yet it was clear that the General had a great fear
of the Casino itself: for why should a person who had lost the use of
her limbs--more especially an old woman--be going to rooms which were
set apart only for roulette? On either side of the wheeled chair walked
Polina and Mlle. Blanche--the latter smiling, modestly jesting, and, in
short, making herself so agreeable to the Grandmother that in the end
the old lady relented towards her. On the other side of the chair
Polina had to answer an endless flow of petty questions--such as "Who
was it passed just now?" "Who is that coming along?" "Is the town a
large one?" "Are the public gardens extensive?" "What sort of trees are
those?" "What is the name of those hills?" "Do I see eagles flying
yonder?" "What is that absurd-looking building?" and so forth.
Meanwhile Astley whispered to me, as he walked by my side, that he
looked for much to happen that morning. Behind the old lady's chair
marched Potapitch and Martha--Potapitch in his frockcoat and white
waistcoat, with a cloak over all, and the forty-year-old and rosy, but
slightly grey-headed, Martha in a mobcap, cotton dress, and squeaking
shoes. Frequently the old lady would twist herself round to converse
with these servants. As for De Griers, he spoke as though he had made
up his mind to do something (though it is also possible that he spoke
in this manner merely in order to hearten the General, with whom he
appeared to have held a conference). But, alas, the Grandmother had
uttered the fatal words, "I am not going to give you any of my money;"
and though De Griers might regard these words lightly, the General knew
his mother better. Also, I noticed that De Griers and Mlle. Blanche
were still exchanging looks; while of the Prince and the German savant
I lost sight at the end of the Avenue, where they had turned back and
left us.

Into the Casino we marched in triumph. At once, both in the person of
the commissionaire and in the persons of the footmen, there sprang to
life the same reverence as had arisen in the lacqueys of the hotel. Yet
it was not without some curiosity that they eyed us.

Without loss of time, the Grandmother gave orders that she should be
wheeled through every room in the establishment; of which apartments
she praised a few, while to others she remained indifferent. Concerning
everything, however, she asked questions. Finally we reached the
gaming-salons, where a lacquey who was, acting as guard over the doors,
flung them open as though he were a man possessed.

The Grandmother's entry into the roulette-salon produced a profound
impression upon the public. Around the tables, and at the further end
of the room where the trente-et-quarante table was set out, there may
have been gathered from 150 to 200 gamblers, ranged in several rows.
Those who had succeeded in pushing their way to the tables were
standing with their feet firmly planted, in order to avoid having to
give up their places until they should have finished their game (since
merely to stand looking on--thus occupying a gambler's place for
nothing--was not permitted). True, chairs were provided around the
tables, but few players made use of them--more especially if there was
a large attendance of the general public; since to stand allowed of a
closer approach; and, therefore, of greater facilities for calculation
and staking. Behind the foremost row were herded a second and a third
row of people awaiting their turn; but sometimes their impatience led
these people to stretch a hand through the first row, in order to
deposit their stakes. Even third-row individuals would dart forward to
stake; whence seldom did more than five or ten minutes pass without a
scene over disputed money arising at one or another end of the table.
On the other hand, the police of the Casino were an able body of men;
and though to escape the crush was an impossibility, however much one
might wish it, the eight croupiers apportioned to each table kept an
eye upon the stakes, performed the necessary reckoning, and decided
disputes as they arose.

In the last resort they always called in the Casino police, and the
disputes would immediately come to an end. Policemen were stationed
about the Casino in ordinary costume, and mingled with the spectators
so as to make it impossible to recognise them. In particular they kept
a lookout for pickpockets and swindlers, who simply swanned in the
roulette salons, and reaped a rich harvest. Indeed, in every direction
money was being filched from pockets or purses--though, of course, if
the attempt miscarried, a great uproar ensued. One had only to approach
a roulette table, begin to play, and then openly grab some one else's
winnings, for a din to be raised, and the thief to start vociferating
that the stake was HIS; and, if the coup had been carried out with
sufficient skill, and the witnesses wavered at all in their testimony,
the thief would as likely as not succeed in getting away with the
money, provided that the sum was not a large one--not large enough to
have attracted the attention of the croupiers or some fellow-player.
Moreover, if it were a stake of insignificant size, its true owner
would sometimes decline to continue the dispute, rather than become
involved in a scandal. Conversely, if the thief was detected, he was
ignominiously expelled the building.

Upon all this the Grandmother gazed with open-eyed curiosity; and, on
some thieves happening to be turned out of the place, she was
delighted. Trente-et-quarante interested her but little; she preferred
roulette, with its ever-revolving wheel. At length she expressed a wish
to view the game closer; whereupon in some mysterious manner, the
lacqueys and other officious agents (especially one or two ruined Poles
of the kind who keep offering their services to successful gamblers and
foreigners in general) at once found and cleared a space for the old
lady among the crush, at the very centre of one of the tables, and next
to the chief croupier; after which they wheeled her chair thither. Upon
this a number of visitors who were not playing, but only looking on
(particularly some Englishmen with their families), pressed closer
forward towards the table, in order to watch the old lady from among
the ranks of the gamblers. Many a lorgnette I saw turned in her
direction, and the croupiers' hopes rose high that such an eccentric
player was about to provide them with something out of the common. An
old lady of seventy-five years who, though unable to walk, desired to
play was not an everyday phenomenon. I too pressed forward towards the
table, and ranged myself by the Grandmother's side; while Martha and
Potapitch remained somewhere in the background among the crowd, and the
General, Polina, and De Griers, with Mlle. Blanche, also remained
hidden among the spectators.

At first the old lady did no more than watch the gamblers, and ply me,
in a half-whisper, with sharp-broken questions as to who was so-and-so.
Especially did her favour light upon a very young man who was plunging
heavily, and had won (so it was whispered) as much as 40,000 francs,
which were lying before him on the table in a heap of gold and
bank-notes. His eyes kept flashing, and his hands shaking; yet all the
while he staked without any sort of calculation--just what came to his
hand, as he kept winning and winning, and raking and raking in his
gains. Around him lacqueys fussed--placing chairs just behind where he
was standing--and clearing the spectators from his vicinity, so that he
should have more room, and not be crowded--the whole done, of course,
in expectation of a generous largesse. From time to time other gamblers
would hand him part of their winnings--being glad to let him stake for
them as much as his hand could grasp; while beside him stood a Pole in
a state of violent, but respectful, agitation, who, also in expectation
of a generous largesse, kept whispering to him at intervals (probably
telling him what to stake, and advising and directing his play). Yet
never once did the player throw him a glance as he staked and staked,
and raked in his winnings. Evidently, the player in question was dead
to all besides.

For a few minutes the Grandmother watched him.

"Go and tell him," suddenly she exclaimed with a nudge at my elbow,
"--go and tell him to stop, and to take his money with him, and go
home. Presently he will be losing--yes, losing everything that he has
now won." She seemed almost breathless with excitement.

"Where is Potapitch?" she continued. "Send Potapitch to speak to him.
No, YOU must tell him, you must tell him,"--here she nudged me
again--"for I have not the least notion where Potapitch is. Sortez,
sortez," she shouted to the young man, until I leant over in her
direction and whispered in her ear that no shouting was allowed, nor
even loud speaking, since to do so disturbed the calculations of the
players, and might lead to our being ejected.

"How provoking!" she retorted. "Then the young man is done for! I
suppose he WISHES to be ruined. Yet I could not bear to see him have to
return it all. What a fool the fellow is!" and the old lady turned
sharply away.

On the left, among the players at the other half of the table, a young
lady was playing, with, beside her, a dwarf. Who the dwarf may have
been--whether a relative or a person whom she took with her to act as a
foil--I do not know; but I had noticed her there on previous occasions,
since, everyday, she entered the Casino at one o'clock precisely, and
departed at two--thus playing for exactly one hour. Being well-known to
the attendants, she always had a seat provided for her; and, taking
some gold and a few thousand-franc notes out of her pocket--would begin
quietly, coldly, and after much calculation, to stake, and mark down
the figures in pencil on a paper, as though striving to work out a
system according to which, at given moments, the odds might group
themselves. Always she staked large coins, and either lost or won one,
two, or three thousand francs a day, but not more; after which she
would depart. The Grandmother took a long look at her.

"THAT woman is not losing," she said. "To whom does she belong? Do you
know her? Who is she?"

"She is, I believe, a Frenchwoman," I replied.

"Ah! A bird of passage, evidently. Besides, I can see that she has her
shoes polished. Now, explain to me the meaning of each round in the
game, and the way in which one ought to stake."

Upon this I set myself to explain the meaning of all the
combinations--of "rouge et noir," of "pair et impair," of "manque et
passe," with, lastly, the different values in the system of numbers.
The Grandmother listened attentively, took notes, put questions in
various forms, and laid the whole thing to heart. Indeed, since an
example of each system of stakes kept constantly occurring, a great
deal of information could be assimilated with ease and celerity. The
Grandmother was vastly pleased.

"But what is zero?" she inquired. "Just now I heard the flaxen-haired
croupier call out 'zero!' And why does he keep raking in all the money
that is on the table? To think that he should grab the whole pile for
himself! What does zero mean?"

"Zero is what the bank takes for itself. If the wheel stops at that
figure, everything lying on the table becomes the absolute property of
the bank. Also, whenever the wheel has begun to turn, the bank ceases
to pay out anything."

"Then I should receive nothing if I were staking?"

"No; unless by any chance you had PURPOSELY staked on zero; in which
case you would receive thirty-five times the value of your stake."

"Why thirty-five times, when zero so often turns up? And if so, why do
not more of these fools stake upon it?"

"Because the number of chances against its occurrence is thirty-six."

"Rubbish! Potapitch, Potapitch! Come here, and I will give you some
money." The old lady took out of her pocket a tightly-clasped purse,
and extracted from its depths a ten-gulden piece. "Go at once, and
stake that upon zero."

"But, Madame, zero has only this moment turned up," I remonstrated;
"wherefore, it may not do so again for ever so long. Wait a little, and
you may then have a better chance."

"Rubbish! Stake, please."

"Pardon me, but zero might not turn up again until, say, tonight, even
though you had staked thousands upon it. It often happens so."

"Rubbish, rubbish! Who fears the wolf should never enter the forest.
What? We have lost? Then stake again."

A second ten-gulden piece did we lose, and then I put down a third. The
Grandmother could scarcely remain seated in her chair, so intent was
she upon the little ball as it leapt through the notches of the
ever-revolving wheel. However, the third ten-gulden piece followed the
first two. Upon this the Grandmother went perfectly crazy. She could no
longer sit still, and actually struck the table with her fist when the
croupier cried out, "Trente-six," instead of the desiderated zero.

"To listen to him!" fumed the old lady. "When will that accursed zero
ever turn up? I cannot breathe until I see it. I believe that that
infernal croupier is PURPOSELY keeping it from turning up. Alexis
Ivanovitch, stake TWO golden pieces this time. The moment we cease to
stake, that cursed zero will come turning up, and we shall get nothing."

"My good Madame--"

