no daily refuge. Do you know from the books that once, in ancient times,
a merchant with just such tearful sighs and prayers stole a pearl from
the halo of the Mother of God, and afterwards, in the face of all the
people, laid the whole price of it at her feet, and the Holy Mother
sheltered him with her mantle before all the people, so that it was a
miracle, and the command was given through the authorities to write it
all down word for word in the Imperial books. And you let a mouse in,
so you insulted the very throne of God. And if you were not my natural
master, whom I dandled in my arms when I was a stripling, I would have
done for you now, without budging from this place!"

Pyotr Stepanovitch flew into a violent rage.

"Tell me, have you seen Stavrogin to-day?"

"Don't you dare to question me. Mr. Stavrogin is fairly amazed at you,
and he had no share in it even in wish, let alone instructions or giving
money. You've presumed with me."

"You'll get the money and you'll get another two thousand in Petersburg,
when you get there, in a lump sum, and you'll get more."

"You are lying, my fine gentleman, and it makes me laugh to see how
easily you are taken in. Mr. Stavrogin stands at the top of the ladder
above you, and you yelp at him from below like a silly puppy dog, while
he thinks it would be doing you an honour to spit at you."

"But do you know," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch in a rage, "that I won't
let you stir a step from here, you scoundrel, and I'll hand you straight
over to the police."

Fedka leapt on to his feet and his eyes gleamed with fury. Pyotr
Stepanovitch pulled out his revolver. Then followed a rapid and
revolting scene: before Pyotr Stepanovitch could take aim, Fedka swung
round and in a flash struck him on the cheek with all his might. Then
there was the thud of a second blow, a third, then a fourth, all on the
cheek. Pyotr Stepanovitch was dazed; with his eyes starting out of his
head, he muttered something, and suddenly crashed full length to the
ground.

"There you are; take him," shouted Fedka with a triumphant swagger; he
instantly took up his cap, his bag from under the bench, and was gone.
Pyotr Stepanovitch lay gasping and unconscious. Liputin even imagined
that he had been murdered. Kirillov ran headlong into the kitchen.

"Water!" he cried, and ladling some water in an iron dipper from a
bucket, he poured it over the injured man's head. Pyotr Stepanovitch
stirred, raised his head, sat up, and looked blankly about him.

"Well, how are you?" asked Kirillov. Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at him
intently, still not recognising him; but seeing Liputin peeping in from
the kitchen, he smiled his hateful smile and suddenly got up, picking up
his revolver from the floor.

"If you take it into your head to run away to-morrow like that scoundrel
Stavrogin," he cried, pouncing furiously on Kirillov, pale, stammering,
and hardly able to articulate his words, "I'll hang you... like a
fly... or crush you... if it's at the other end of the world... do you
understand!"

And he held the revolver straight at Kirillov's head; but almost at the
same minute, coming completely to himself, he drew back his hand, thrust
the revolver into his pocket, and without saying another word ran out of
the house. Liputin followed him. They clambered through the same gap and
again walked along the slope holding to the fence. Pyotr Stepanovitch
strode rapidly down the street so that Liputin could scarcely keep up
with him. At the first crossing he suddenly stopped.

"Well?" He turned to Liputin with a challenge.

Liputin remembered the revolver and was still trembling all over after
the scene he had witnessed; but the answer seemed to come of itself
irresistibly from his tongue:

"I think... I think that..."

"Did you see what Fedka was drinking in the kitchen?"

"What he was drinking? He was drinking vodka."

"Well then, let me tell you it's the last time in his life he will drink
vodka. I recommend you to remember that and reflect on it. And now go to
hell; you are not wanted till to-morrow. But mind now, don't be a fool!"

Liputin rushed home full speed.

IV

He had long had a passport in readiness made out in a false name. It
seems a wild idea that this prudent little man, the petty despot of
his family, who was, above all things, a sharp man of business and a
capitalist, and who was an official too (though he was a Fourierist),
should long before have conceived the fantastic project of procuring
this passport in case of emergency, that he might escape abroad by means
of it _if_... he did admit the possibility of this if, though no doubt he
was never able himself to formulate what this _if_ might mean.

But now it suddenly formulated itself, and in a most unexpected way.
That desperate idea with which he had gone to Kirillov's after that
"fool" he had heard from Pyotr Stepanovitch on the pavement, had been
to abandon everything at dawn next day and to emigrate abroad. If anyone
doubts that such fantastic incidents occur in everyday Russian life,
even now, let him look into the biographies of all the Russian exiles
abroad. Not one of them escaped with more wisdom or real justification.
It has always been the unrestrained domination of phantoms and nothing
more.

Running home, he began by locking himself in, getting out his travelling
bag, and feverishly beginning to pack. His chief anxiety was the
question of money, and how much he could rescue from the impending
ruin--and by what means. He thought of it as "rescuing," for it seemed
to him that he could not linger an hour, and that by daylight he must
be on the high road. He did not know where to take the train either; he
vaguely determined to take it at the second or third big station from
the town, and to make his way there on foot, if necessary. In that way,
instinctively and mechanically he busied himself in his packing with a
perfect whirl of ideas in his head--and suddenly stopped short, gave it
all up, and with a deep groan stretched himself on the sofa.

He felt clearly, and suddenly realised that he might escape, but that
he was by now utterly incapable of deciding whether he ought to make off
_before or after_ Shatov's death; that he was simply a lifeless body, a
crude inert mass; that he was being moved by an awful outside power; and
that, though he had a passport to go abroad, that though he could run
away from Shatov (otherwise what need was there of such haste?), yet he
would run away, not from Shatov, not before his murder, but _after_ it,
and that that was determined, signed, and sealed.

In insufferable distress, trembling every instant and wondering at
himself, alternately groaning aloud and numb with terror, he managed to
exist till eleven o'clock next morning locked in and lying on the sofa;
then came the shock he was awaiting, and it at once determined him. When
he unlocked his door and went out to his household at eleven o'clock
they told him that the runaway convict and brigand, Fedka, who was a
terror to every one, who had pillaged churches and only lately been
guilty of murder and arson, who was being pursued and could not be
captured by our police, had been found at daybreak murdered, five miles
from the town, at a turning off the high road, and that the whole town
was talking of it already. He rushed headlong out of the house at once
to find out further details, and learned, to begin with, that Fedka, who
had been found with his skull broken, had apparently been robbed and,
secondly, that the police already had strong suspicion and even good
grounds for believing that the murderer was one of the Shpigulin men
called Fomka, the very one who had been his accomplice in murdering the
Lebyadkins and setting fire to their house, and that there had been a
quarrel between them on the road about a large sum of money stolen from
Lebyadkin, which Fedka was supposed to have hidden. Liputin ran to Pyotr
Stepanovitch's lodgings and succeeded in learning at the back door, on
the sly, that though Pyotr Stepanovitch had not returned home till about
one o'clock at night, he had slept there quietly all night till eight
o'clock next morning. Of course, there could be no doubt that there was
nothing extraordinary about Fedka's death, and that such careers usually
have such an ending; but the coincidence of the fatal words that "it was
the last time Fedka would drink vodka," with the prompt fulfilment of
the prediction, was so remarkable that Liputin no longer hesitated. The
shock had been given; it was as though a stone had fallen upon him and
crushed him for ever. Returning home, he thrust his travelling-bag under
the bed without a word, and in the evening at the hour fixed he was the
first to appear at the appointed spot to meet Shatov, though it's true
he still had his passport in his pocket.




CHAPTER V. A WANDERER

THE CATASTROPHE WITH Liza and the death of Marya Timofyevna made an
overwhelming impression on Shatov. I have already mentioned that that
morning I met him in passing; he seemed to me not himself. He told me
among other things that on the evening before at nine o'clock (that
is, three hours before the fire had broken out) he had been at Marya
Timofyevna's. He went in the morning to look at the corpses, but as far
as I know gave no evidence of any sort that morning. Meanwhile, towards
the end of the day there was a perfect tempest in his soul, and... I
think I can say with certainty that there was a moment at dusk when he
wanted to get up, go out and tell everything. What that _everything_ was,
no one but he could say. Of course he would have achieved nothing, and
would have simply betrayed himself. He had no proofs whatever with which
to convict the perpetrators of the crime, and, indeed, he had nothing
but vague conjectures to go upon, though to him they amounted to
complete certainty. But he was ready to ruin himself if he could only
"crush the scoundrels"--his own words. Pyotr Stepanovitch had guessed
fairly correctly at this impulse in him, and he knew himself that he
was risking a great deal in putting off the execution of his new
awful project till next day. On his side there was, as usual, great
self-confidence and contempt for all these "wretched creatures" and for
Shatov in particular. He had for years despised Shatov for his "whining
idiocy," as he had expressed it in former days abroad, and he was
absolutely confident that he could deal with such a guileless creature,
that is, keep an eye on him all that day, and put a check on him at the
first sign of danger. Yet what saved "the scoundrels" for a short time
was something quite unexpected which they had not foreseen....

Towards eight o'clock in the evening (at the very time when the quintet
was meeting at Erkel's, and waiting in indignation and excitement for
Pyotr Stepanovitch) Shatov was lying in the dark on his bed with a
headache and a slight chill; he was tortured by uncertainty, he was
angry, he kept making up his mind, and could not make it up finally, and
felt, with a curse, that it would all lead to nothing. Gradually he sank
into a brief doze and had something like a nightmare. He dreamt that
he was lying on his bed, tied up with cords and unable to stir, and
meantime he heard a terrible banging that echoed all over the house, a
banging on the fence, at the gate, at his door, in Kirillov's lodge,
so that the whole house was shaking, and a far-away familiar voice that
wrung his heart was calling to him piteously. He suddenly woke and sat
up in bed. To his surprise the banging at the gate went on, though
not nearly so violent as it had seemed in his dream. The knocks were
repeated and persistent, and the strange voice "that wrung his heart"
could still be heard below at the gate, though not piteously but angrily
and impatiently, alternating with another voice, more restrained and
ordinary. He jumped up, opened the casement pane and put his head out.

"Who's there?" he called, literally numb with terror.

"If you are Shatov," the answer came harshly and resolutely from below,
"be so good as to tell me straight out and honestly whether you agree to
let me in or not?"

It was true: he recognised the voice!

"Marie!... Is it you?"

"Yes, yes, Marya Shatov, and I assure you I can't keep the driver a
minute longer."

"This minute... I'll get a candle," Shatov cried faintly. Then he rushed
to look for the matches. The matches, as always happens at such moments,
could not be found. He dropped the candlestick and the candle on the
floor and as soon as he heard the impatient voice from below again, he
abandoned the search and dashed down the steep stairs to open the gate.

"Be so good as to hold the bag while I settle with this blockhead," was
how Madame Marya Shatov greeted him below, and she thrust into his hands
a rather light cheap canvas handbag studded with brass nails, of Dresden
manufacture. She attacked the driver with exasperation.

"Allow me to tell you, you are asking too much. If you've been driving
me for an extra hour through these filthy streets, that's your fault,
because it seems you didn't know where to find this stupid street and
imbecile house. Take your thirty kopecks and make up your mind that
you'll get nothing more."

"Ech, lady, you told me yourself Voznesensky Street and this is
Bogoyavlensky; Voznesensky is ever so far away. You've simply put the
horse into a steam."

"Voznesensky, Bogoyavlensky--you ought to know all those stupid names
better than I do, as you are an inhabitant; besides, you are unfair, I
told you first of all Filipov's house and you declared you knew it. In
any case you can have me up to-morrow in the local court, but now I beg
you to let me alone."

"Here, here's another five kopecks." With eager haste Shatov pulled a
five-kopeck piece out of his pocket and gave it to the driver.

"Do me a favour, I beg you, don't dare to do that!" Madame Shatov flared
up, but the driver drove off and Shatov, taking her hand, drew her
through the gate.

"Make haste, Marie, make haste... that's no matter, and... you are wet
through. Take care, we go up here--how sorry I am there's no light--the
stairs are steep, hold tight, hold tight! Well, this is my room. Excuse
my having no light... One minute!"

He picked up the candlestick but it was a long time before the matches
were found. Madame Shatov stood waiting in the middle of the room,
silent and motionless.

"Thank God, here they are at last!" he cried joyfully, lighting up the
room. Marya Shatov took a cursory survey of his abode.

"They told me you lived in a poor way, but I didn't expect it to be
as bad as this," she pronounced with an air of disgust, and she moved
towards the bed.

"Oh, I am tired!" she sat down on the hard bed, with an exhausted air.
"Please put down the bag and sit down on the chair yourself. Just as you
like though; you are in the way standing there. I have come to you for
a time, till I can get work, because I know nothing of this place and I
have no money. But if I shall be in your way I beg you again, be so good
as to tell me so at once, as you are bound to do if you are an honest
man. I could sell something to-morrow and pay for a room at an hotel,
but you must take me to the hotel yourself.... Oh, but I am tired!"

Shatov was all of a tremor.

"You mustn't, Marie, you mustn't go to an hotel! An hotel! What for?
What for?"

He clasped his hands imploringly....

"Well, if I can get on without the hotel... I must, any way, explain the
position. Remember, Shatov, that we lived in Geneva as man and wife for
a fortnight and a few days; it's three years since we parted, without
any particular quarrel though. But don't imagine that I've come back
to renew any of the foolishness of the past. I've come back to look for
work, and that I've come straight to this town is just because it's all
the same to me. I've not come to say I am sorry for anything; please
don't imagine anything so stupid as that."

"Oh, Marie! This is unnecessary, quite unnecessary," Shatov muttered
vaguely.

"If so, if you are so far developed as to be able to understand that, I
may allow myself to add, that if I've come straight to you now and am
in your lodging, it's partly because I always thought you were far
from being a scoundrel and were perhaps much better than other...
blackguards!"

Her eyes flashed. She must have had to bear a great deal at the hands of
some "blackguards."

"And please believe me, I wasn't laughing at you just now when I told
you you were good. I spoke plainly, without fine phrases and I can't
endure them. But that's all nonsense. I always hoped you would have
sense enough not to pester me.... Enough, I am tired."

And she bent on him a long, harassed and weary gaze. Shatov stood
facing her at the other end of the room, which was five paces away, and
listened to her timidly with a look of new life and unwonted radiance
on his face. This strong, rugged man, all bristles on the surface,
was suddenly all softness and shining gladness. There was a thrill
of extraordinary and unexpected feeling in his soul. Three years of
separation, three years of the broken marriage had effaced nothing from
his heart. And perhaps every day during those three years he had dreamed
of her, of that beloved being who had once said to him, "I love you."
Knowing Shatov I can say with certainty that he could never have allowed
himself even to dream that a woman might say to him, "I love you."
He was savagely modest and chaste, he looked on himself as a perfect
monster, detested his own face as well as his character, compared
himself to some freak only fit to be exhibited at fairs. Consequently
he valued honesty above everything and was fanatically devoted to his
convictions; he was gloomy, proud, easily moved to wrath, and sparing
of words. But here was the one being who had loved him for a fortnight
(that he had never doubted, never!), a being he had always considered
immeasurably above him in spite of his perfectly sober understanding of
her errors; a being to whom he could forgive everything, _everything_ (of
that there could be no question; indeed it was quite the other way, his
idea was that he was entirely to blame); this woman, this Marya Shatov,
was in his house, in his presence again... it was almost inconceivable!
He was so overcome, there was so much that was terrible and at the same
time so much happiness in this event that he could not, perhaps would
not--perhaps was afraid to--realise the position. It was a dream. But
when she looked at him with that harassed gaze he suddenly understood
that this woman he loved so dearly was suffering, perhaps had been
wronged. His heart went cold. He looked at her features with anguish:
the first bloom of youth had long faded from this exhausted face. It's
true that she was still good-looking--in his eyes a beauty, as she had
always been. In reality she was a woman of twenty-five, rather strongly
built, above the medium height (taller than Shatov), with abundant dark
brown hair, a pale oval face, and large dark eyes now glittering with
feverish brilliance. But the light-hearted, naïve and good-natured
energy he had known so well in the past was replaced now by a sullen
irritability and disillusionment, a sort of cynicism which was not yet
habitual to her herself, and which weighed upon her. But the chief thing
was that she was ill, that he could see clearly. In spite of the awe in
which he stood of her he suddenly went up to her and took her by both
hands.

"Marie... you know... you are very tired, perhaps, for God's sake, don't
be angry.... If you'd consent to have some tea, for instance, eh? Tea
picks one up so, doesn't it? If you'd consent!"

"Why talk about consenting! Of course I consent, what a baby you are
still. Get me some if you can. How cramped you are here. How cold it
is!"

"Oh, I'll get some logs for the fire directly, some logs... I've got
logs." Shatov was all astir. "Logs... that is... but I'll get tea
directly," he waved his hand as though with desperate determination and
snatched up his cap.

"Where are you going? So you've no tea in the house?"

"There shall be, there shall be, there shall be, there shall be
everything directly.... I..." he took his revolver from the shelf, "I'll
sell this revolver directly... or pawn it...."

"What foolishness and what a time that will take! Take my money if
you've nothing, there's eighty kopecks here, I think; that's all I have.
This is like a madhouse."

"I don't want your money, I don't want it I'll be here directly, in one
instant. I can manage without the revolver...."

And he rushed straight to Kirillov's. This was probably two hours before
the visit of Pyotr Stepanovitch and Liputin to Kirillov. Though Shatov
and Kirillov lived in the same yard they hardly ever saw each other, and
when they met they did not nod or speak: they had been too long "lying
side by side" in America....

"Kirillov, you always have tea; have you got tea and a samovar?"

Kirillov, who was walking up and down the room, as he was in the habit
of doing all night, stopped and looked intently at his hurried visitor,
though without much surprise.

"I've got tea and sugar and a samovar. But there's no need of the
samovar, the tea is hot. Sit down and simply drink it."

"Kirillov, we lay side by side in America.... My wife has come to me ...
I... give me the tea.... I shall want the samovar."

"If your wife is here you want the samovar. But take it later. I've
two. And now take the teapot from the table. It's hot, boiling hot. Take
everything, take the sugar, all of it. Bread... there's plenty of bread;
all of it. There's some veal. I've a rouble."

"Give it me, friend, I'll pay it back to-morrow! Ach, Kirillov!"

"Is it the same wife who was in Switzerland? That's a good thing. And
your running in like this, that's a good thing too."

"Kirillov!" cried Shatov, taking the teapot under his arm and carrying
the bread and sugar in both hands. "Kirillov, if... if you could get rid
of your dreadful fancies and give up your atheistic ravings... oh, what
a man you'd be, Kirillov!"

"One can see you love your wife after Switzerland. It's a good thing you
do--after Switzerland. When you want tea, come again. You can come all
night, I don't sleep at all. There'll be a samovar. Take the rouble,
here it is. Go to your wife, I'll stay here and think about you and your
wife."

Marya Shatov was unmistakably pleased at her husband's haste and fell
upon the tea almost greedily, but there was no need to run for the
samovar; she drank only half a cup and swallowed a tiny piece of bread.
The veal she refused with disgust and irritation.

"You are ill, Marie, all this is a sign of illness," Shatov remarked
timidly as he waited upon her.

"Of course I'm ill, please sit down. Where did you get the tea if you
haven't any?"

Shatov told her about Kirillov briefly. She had heard something of him.

"I know he is mad; say no more, please; there are plenty of fools. So
you've been in America? I heard, you wrote."

"Yes, I... I wrote to you in Paris."

"Enough, please talk of something else. Are you a Slavophil in your
convictions?"

"I... I am not exactly.... Since I cannot be a Russian, I became a
Slavophil." He smiled a wry smile with the effort of one who feels he
has made a strained and inappropriate jest.

"Why, aren't you a Russian?"

"No, I'm not."

"Well, that's all foolishness. Do sit down, I entreat you. Why are you
all over the place? Do you think I am lightheaded? Perhaps I shall be.
You say there are only you two in the house."

"Yes.... Downstairs..."

"And both such clever people. What is there downstairs? You said
downstairs?"

"No, nothing."

"Why nothing? I want to know."

"I only meant to say that now we are only two in the yard, but that the
Lebyadkins used to live downstairs...."

"That woman who was murdered last night?" she started suddenly. "I heard
of it. I heard of it as soon as I arrived. There was a fire here, wasn't
there?"

"Yes, Marie, yes, and perhaps I am doing a scoundrelly thing this moment
in forgiving the scoundrels...." He stood up suddenly and paced about
the room, raising his arms as though in a frenzy.

But Marie had not quite understood him. She heard his answers
inattentively; she asked questions but did not listen.

"Fine things are being done among you! Oh, how contemptible it all is!
What scoundrels men all are! But do sit down, I beg you, oh, how you
exasperate me!" and she let her head sink on the pillow, exhausted.

"Marie, I won't.... Perhaps you'll lie down, Marie?" She made no answer
and closed her eyes helplessly. Her pale face looked death-like. She
fell asleep almost instantly. Shatov looked round, snuffed the candle,
looked uneasily at her face once, more, pressed his hands tight in front
of him and walked on tiptoe out of the room into the passage. At the
top of the stairs he stood in the corner with his face to the wall and
remained so for ten minutes without sound or movement. He would have
stood there longer, but he suddenly caught the sound of soft cautious
steps below. Some one was coming up the stairs. Shatov remembered he had
forgotten to fasten the gate.

"Who's there?" he asked in a whisper. The unknown visitor went on slowly
mounting the stairs without answering. When he reached the top he stood
still; it was impossible to see his face in the dark; suddenly Shatov
heard the cautious question:

"Ivan Shatov?"

Shatov said who he was, but at once held out his hand to check his
advance. The latter took his hand, and Shatov shuddered as though he had
touched some terrible reptile.

"Stand here," he whispered quickly. "Don't go in, I can't receive you
just now. My wife has come back. I'll fetch the candle."

When he returned with the candle he found a young officer standing
there; he did not know his name but he had seen him before.

"Erkel," said the lad, introducing himself. "You've seen me at
Virginsky's."

"I remember; you sat writing. Listen," said Shatov in sudden excitement,
going up to him frantically, but still talking in a whisper. "You gave
me a sign just now when you took my hand. But you know I can treat all
these signals with contempt! I don't acknowledge them.... I don't want
them.... I can throw you downstairs this minute, do you know that?"

"No, I know nothing about that and I don't know what you are in such a
rage about," the visitor answered without malice and almost ingenuously.
"I have only to give you a message, and that's what I've come for, being
particularly anxious not to lose time. You have a printing press which
does not belong to you, and of which you are bound to give an account,
as you know yourself. I have received instructions to request you to
give it up to-morrow at seven o'clock in the evening to Liputin. I have
been instructed to tell you also that nothing more will be asked of
you."

"Nothing?"

"Absolutely nothing. Your request is granted, and you are struck off our
list. I was instructed to tell you that positively."

"Who instructed you to tell me?"

"Those who told me the sign."

"Have you come from abroad?"

"I... I think that's no matter to you."

"Oh, hang it! Why didn't you come before if you were told to?"

"I followed certain instructions and was not alone."

"I understand, I understand that you were not alone. Eh... hang it! But
why didn't Liputin come himself?"

"So I shall come for you to-morrow at exactly six o'clock in the
evening, and we'll go there on foot. There will be no one there but us
three."

"Will Verhovensky be there?"

"No, he won't. Verhovensky is leaving the town at eleven o'clock
to-morrow morning."

"Just what I thought!" Shatov whispered furiously, and he struck his
fist on his hip. "He's run off, the sneak!"

He sank into agitated reflection. Erkel looked intently at him and
waited in silence.

"But how will you take it? You can't simply pick it up in your hands and
carry it."

"There will be no need to. You'll simply point out the place and we'll
just make sure that it really is buried there. We only know whereabouts
the place is, we don't know the place itself. And have you pointed the
place out to anyone else yet?"

Shatov looked at him.

"You, you, a chit of a boy like you, a silly boy like you, you too have
got caught in that net like a sheep? Yes, that's just the young blood
they want! Well, go along. E-ech! that scoundrel's taken you all in and
run away."

Erkel looked at him serenely and calmly but did not seem to understand.

"Verhovensky, Verhovensky has run away!" Shatov growled fiercely.

"But he is still here, he is not gone away. He is not going till
to-morrow," Erkel observed softly and persuasively. "I particularly
begged him to be present as a witness; my instructions all referred to
him (he explained frankly like a young and inexperienced boy). But I
regret to say he did not agree on the ground of his departure, and he
really is in a hurry."

Shatov glanced compassionately at the simple youth again, but suddenly
gave a gesture of despair as though he thought "they are not worth
pitying."

"All right, I'll come," he cut him short. "And now get away, be off."

"So I'll come for you at six o'clock punctually." Erkel made a courteous
bow and walked deliberately downstairs.

"Little fool!" Shatov could not help shouting after him from the top.

"What is it?" responded the lad from the bottom.

"Nothing, you can go."

"I thought you said something."

II

Erkel was a "little fool" who was only lacking in the higher form
of reason, the ruling power of the intellect; but of the lesser, the
subordinate reasoning faculties, he had plenty--even to the point of
cunning. Fanatically, childishly devoted to "the cause" or rather in
reality to Pyotr Verhovensky, he acted on the instructions given to him
when at the meeting of the quintet they had agreed and had distributed
the various duties for the next day. When Pyotr Stepanovitch gave him
the job of messenger, he succeeded in talking to him aside for ten
minutes.

A craving for active service was characteristic of this shallow,
unreflecting nature, which was for ever yearning to follow the lead
of another man's will, of course for the good of "the common" or "the
great" cause. Not that that made any difference, for little fanatics
like Erkel can never imagine serving a cause except by identifying
it with the person who, to their minds, is the expression of it. The
sensitive, affectionate and kind-hearted Erkel was perhaps the most
callous of Shatov's would-be murderers, and, though he had no personal
spite against him, he would have been present at his murder without the
quiver of an eyelid. He had been instructed; for instance, to have a
good look at Shatov's surroundings while carrying out his commission,
and when Shatov, receiving him at the top of the stairs, blurted out to
him, probably unaware in the heat of the moment, that his wife had come
back to him--Erkel had the instinctive cunning to avoid displaying the
slightest curiosity, though the idea flashed through his mind that the
fact of his wife's return was of great importance for the success of
their undertaking.

And so it was in reality; it was only that fact that saved the
"scoundrels" from Shatov's carrying out his intention, and at the same
time helped them "to get rid of him." To begin with, it agitated Shatov,
threw him out of his regular routine, and deprived him of his usual
clear-sightedness and caution. Any idea of his own danger would be the
last thing to enter his head at this moment when he was absorbed with
such different considerations. On the contrary, he eagerly believed that
Pyotr Verhovensky was running away the next day: it fell in exactly with
his suspicions! Returning to the room he sat down again in a corner,
leaned his elbows on his knees and hid his face in his hands. Bitter
thoughts tormented him....

Then he would raise his head again and go on tiptoe to look at her.
"Good God! she will be in a fever by to-morrow morning; perhaps it's
begun already! She must have caught cold. She is not accustomed to this
awful climate, and then a third-class carriage, the storm, the rain, and
she has such a thin little pelisse, no wrap at all.... And to leave
her like this, to abandon her in her helplessness! Her bag, too, her
bag--what a tiny, light thing, all crumpled up, scarcely weighs ten
pounds! Poor thing, how worn out she is, how much she's been through!
She is proud, that's why she won't complain. But she is irritable, very
irritable. It's illness; an angel will grow irritable in illness. What
a dry forehead, it must be hot--how dark she is under the eyes,
and... and yet how beautiful the oval of her face is and her rich hair,
how..."

And he made haste to turn away his eyes, to walk away as though he were
frightened at the very idea of seeing in her anything but an unhappy,
exhausted fellow-creature who needed _help_--"how could he think of
_hopes_, oh, how mean, how base is man!" And he would go back to his
corner, sit down, hide his face in his hands and again sink into dreams
and reminiscences... and again he was haunted by hopes.

"Oh, I am tired, I am tired," he remembered her exclamations, her
weak broken voice. "Good God! Abandon her now, and she has only eighty
kopecks; she held out her purse, a tiny old thing! She's come to look
for a job. What does she know about jobs? What do they know about
Russia? Why, they are like naughty children, they've nothing but their
own fancies made up by themselves, and she is angry, poor thing,
that Russia is not like their foreign dreams! The luckless, innocent
creatures!... It's really cold here, though."

He remembered that she had complained, that he had promised to heat the
stove. "There are logs here, I can fetch them if only I don't wake her.
But I can do it without waking her. But what shall I do about the veal?
When she gets up perhaps she will be hungry.... Well, that will do
later: Kirillov doesn't go to bed all night. What could I cover her
with, she is sleeping so soundly, but she must be cold, ah, she must be
cold!" And once more he went to look at her; her dress had worked up
a little and her right leg was half uncovered to the knee. He suddenly
turned away almost in dismay, took off his warm overcoat, and, remaining
in his wretched old jacket, covered it up, trying not to look at it.

A great deal of time was spent in righting the fire, stepping about
on tiptoe, looking at the sleeping woman, dreaming in the corner, then
looking at her again. Two or three hours had passed. During that time
Verhovensky and Liputin had been at Kirillov's. At last he, too, began
to doze in the corner. He heard her groan; she waked up and called him;
he jumped up like a criminal.

"Marie, I was dropping asleep.... Ah, what a wretch I am, Marie!"

She sat up, looking about her with wonder, seeming not to recognise
where she was, and suddenly leapt up in indignation and anger.

"I've taken your bed, I fell asleep so tired I didn't know what I was
doing; how dared you not wake me? How could you dare imagine I meant to
be a burden to you?"

"How could I wake you, Marie?"

"You could, you ought to have! You've no other bed here, and I've taken
yours. You had no business to put me into a false position. Or do you
suppose that I've come to take advantage of your charity? Kindly get
into your bed at once and I'll lie down in the corner on some chairs."

"Marie, there aren't chairs enough, and there's nothing to put on them."

"Then simply oil the floor. Or you'll have to lie on the floor yourself.
I want to lie on the floor at once, at once!"

She stood up, tried to take a step, but suddenly a violent spasm of pain
deprived her of all power and all determination, and with a loud groan
she fell back on the bed. Shatov ran up, but Marie, hiding her face in
the pillow, seized his hand and gripped and squeezed it with all her
might. This lasted a minute.

"Marie darling, there's a doctor Frenzel living here, a friend of
mine.... I could run for him."

"Nonsense!"

"What do you mean by nonsense? Tell me, Marie, what is it hurting you?
For we might try fomentations... on the stomach for instance.... I can
do that without a doctor.... Or else mustard poultices."

"What's this," she asked strangely, raising her head and looking at him
in dismay.

"What's what, Marie?" said Shatov, not understanding. "What are you
asking about? Good heavens! I am quite bewildered, excuse my not
understanding."

"Ach, let me alone; it's not your business to understand. And it would
be too absurd..." she said with a bitter smile. "Talk to me about
something. Walk about the room and talk. Don't stand over me and don't
look at me, I particularly ask you that for the five-hundredth time!"

Shatov began walking up and down the room, looking at the floor, and
doing his utmost not to glance at her.

"There's--don't be angry, Marie, I entreat you--there's some veal here,
and there's tea not far off.... You had so little before."

She made an angry gesture of disgust. Shatov bit his tongue in despair.

"Listen, I intend to open a bookbinding business here, on rational
co-operative principles. Since you live here what do you think of it,
would it be successful?"

"Ech, Marie, people don't read books here, and there are none here at
all. And are they likely to begin binding them!"

"Who are they?"

"The local readers and inhabitants generally, Marie."

"Well, then, speak more clearly. _They_ indeed, and one doesn't know who
they are. You don't know grammar!"

"It's in the spirit of the language," Shatov muttered.

"Oh, get along with your spirit, you bore me. Why shouldn't the local
inhabitant or reader have his books bound?"

"Because reading books and having them bound are two different stages of
development, and there's a vast gulf between them. To begin with, a man
gradually gets used to reading, in the course of ages of course, but
takes no care of his books and throws them about, not thinking them
worth attention. But binding implies respect for books, and implies
that not only he has grown fond of reading, but that he looks upon it as
something of value. That period has not been reached anywhere in Russia
yet. In Europe books have been bound for a long while."

"Though that's pedantic, anyway, it's not stupid, and reminds me of the
time three years ago; you used to be rather clever sometimes three years
ago."

She said this as disdainfully as her other capricious remarks.

"Marie, Marie," said Shatov, turning to her, much moved, "oh, Marie!
If you only knew how much has happened in those three years! I heard
afterwards that you despised me for changing my convictions. But what
are the men I've broken with? The enemies of all true life, out-of-date
Liberals who are afraid of their own independence, the flunkeys
of thought, the enemies of individuality and freedom, the decrepit
advocates of deadness and rottenness! All they have to offer is
senility, a glorious mediocrity of the most bourgeois kind, contemptible
shallowness, a jealous equality, equality without individual dignity,
equality as it's understood by flunkeys or by the French in '93. And
the worst of it is there are swarms of scoundrels among them, swarms of
scoundrels!"

"Yes, there are a lot of scoundrels," she brought out abruptly with
painful effort. She lay stretched out, motionless, as though afraid
to move, with her head thrown back on the pillow, rather on one side,
staring at the ceiling with exhausted but glowing eyes. Her face was
pale, her lips were dry and hot.

"You recognise it, Marie, you recognise it," cried Shatov. She tried to
shake her head, and suddenly the same spasm came over her again. Again
she hid her face in the pillow, and again for a full minute she squeezed
Shatov's hand till it hurt. He had run up, beside himself with alarm.

"Marie, Marie! But it may be very serious, Marie!"

"Be quiet... I won't have it, I won't have it," she screamed almost
furiously, turning her face upwards again. "Don't dare to look at me
with your sympathy! Walk about the room, say something, talk...."

Shatov began muttering something again, like one distraught.

"What do you do here?" she asked, interrupting him with contemptuous
impatience.

"I work in a merchant's office. I could get a fair amount of money even
here if I cared to, Marie."

"So much the better for you...."

"Oh, don't suppose I meant anything, Marie. I said it without thinking."

"And what do you do besides? What are you preaching? You can't exist
without preaching, that's your character!"

"I am preaching God, Marie."

"In whom you don't believe yourself. I never could see the idea of that."

"Let's leave that, Marie; we'll talk of that later."

"What sort of person was this Marya Timofyevna here?"

"We'll talk of that later too, Marie."

"Don't dare to say such things to me! Is it true that her death may have
been caused by... the wickedness... of these people?"

"Not a doubt of it," growled Shatov.

Marie suddenly raised her head and cried out painfully:

"Don't dare speak of that to me again, don't dare to, never, never!"

And she fell back in bed again, overcome by the same convulsive agony;
it was the third time, but this time her groans were louder, in fact she
screamed.

"Oh, you insufferable man! Oh, you unbearable man," she cried, tossing
about recklessly, and pushing away Shatov as he bent over her.

"Marie, I'll do anything you like.... I'll walk about and talk...."

"Surely you must see that it has begun!"

"What's begun, Marie?"

"How can I tell! Do I know anything about it?... I curse myself! Oh,
curse it all from the beginning!"

"Marie, if you'd tell me what's beginning... or else I... if you don't,
what am I to make of it?"

"You are a useless, theoretical babbler. Oh, curse everything on earth!"

"Marie, Marie!" He seriously thought that she was beginning to go mad.

"Surely you must see that I am in the agonies of childbirth," she said,
sitting up and gazing at him with a terrible, hysterical vindictiveness
that distorted her whole face. "I curse him before he is born, this
child!"

"Marie," cried Shatov, realising at last what it meant. "Marie... but
why didn't you tell me before." He pulled himself together at once and
seized his cap with an air of vigorous determination.

"How could I tell when I came in here? Should I have come to you if I'd
known? I was told it would be another ten days! Where are you going?...
Where are you going? You mustn't dare!"

"To fetch a midwife! I'll sell the revolver. We must get money before
anything else now."

"Don't dare to do anything, don't dare to fetch a midwife! Bring a
peasant woman, any old woman, I've eighty kopecks in my purse....
Peasant women have babies without midwives.... And if I die, so much the
better...."

"You shall have a midwife and an old woman too. But how am I to leave
you alone, Marie!"

But reflecting that it was better to leave her alone now in spite of
her desperate state than to leave her without help later, he paid
no attention to her groans, nor her angry exclamations, but rushed
downstairs, hurrying all he could.

III

First of all he went to Kirillov. It was by now about one o'clock in the
night. Kirillov was standing in the middle of the room.

"Kirillov, my wife is in childbirth."

"How do you mean?"

"Childbirth, bearing a child!"

"You... are not mistaken?"

"Oh, no, no, she is in agonies! I want a woman, any old woman, I must
have one at once.... Can you get one now? You used to have a lot of old
women...."

"Very sorry that I am no good at childbearing," Kirillov answered
thoughtfully; "that is, not at childbearing, but at doing anything for
childbearing... or... no, I don't know how to say it."

"You mean you can't assist at a confinement yourself? But that's not
what I've come for. An old woman, I want a woman, a nurse, a servant!"

"You shall have an old woman, but not directly, perhaps... If you like
I'll come instead...."

"Oh, impossible; I am running to Madame Virginsky, the midwife, now."

"A horrid woman!"

"Oh, yes, Kirillov, yes, but she is the best of them all. Yes, it'll all
be without reverence, without gladness, with contempt, with abuse, with
blasphemy in the presence of so great a mystery, the coming of a new
creature! Oh, she is cursing it already!"

"If you like I'll..."

"No, no, but while I'm running (oh, I'll make Madame Virginsky come),
will you go to the foot of my staircase and quietly listen? But don't
venture to go in, you'll frighten her; don't go in on any account, you
must only listen... in case anything dreadful happens. If anything very
bad happens, then run in."

"I understand. I've another rouble. Here it is. I meant to have a fowl
to-morrow, but now I don't want to, make haste, run with all your might.
There's a samovar all the night."

Kirillov knew nothing of the present design against Shatov, nor had he
had any idea in the past of the degree of danger that threatened him.
He only knew that Shatov had some old scores with "those people,"
and although he was to some extent involved with them himself through
instructions he had received from abroad (not that these were of
much consequence, however, for he had never taken any direct share in
anything), yet of late he had given it all up, having left off doing
anything especially for the "cause," and devoted himself entirely to a
life of contemplation. Although Pyotr Stepanovitch had at the meeting
invited Liputin to go with him to Kirillov's to make sure that the
latter would take upon himself, at a given moment, the responsibility
for the "Shatov business," yet in his interview with Kirillov he had
said no word about Shatov nor alluded to him in any way--probably
considering it impolitic to do so, and thinking that Kirillov could
not be relied upon. He put off speaking about it till next day, when it
would be all over and would therefore not matter to Kirillov; such at
least was Pyotr Stepanovitch's judgment of him. Liputin, too, was
struck by the fact that Shatov was not mentioned in spite of what Pyotr
Stepanovitch had promised, but he was too much agitated to protest.

Shatov ran like a hurricane to Virginsky's house, cursing the distance
and feeling it endless.

He had to knock a long time at Virginsky's; every one had been asleep a
long while. But Shatov did not scruple to bang at the shutters with
all his might. The dog chained up in the yard dashed about barking
furiously. The dogs caught it up all along the street, and there was a
regular babel of barking.

"Why are you knocking and what do you want?" Shatov heard at the window
at last Virginsky's gentle voice, betraying none of the resentment
appropriate to the "outrage." The shutter was pushed back a little and
the casement was opened.

"Who's there, what scoundrel is it?" shrilled a female voice which
betrayed all the resentment appropriate to the "outrage." It was the old
maid, Virginsky's relation.

"I am Shatov, my wife has come back to me and she is just confined...."

"Well, let her be, get along."

"I've come for Arina Prohorovna; I won't go without Arina Prohorovna!"

"She can't attend to every one. Practice at night is a special line.
Take yourself off to Maksheyev's and don't dare to make that din,"
rattled the exasperated female voice. He could hear Virginsky checking
