Socialistic notions, and the correct tone of the aristocratic salon and
the free-and-easy, almost pot-house, manners of the young people that
surrounded her. She dreamed of "giving happiness" and reconciling
the irreconcilable, or, rather, of uniting all and everything in
the adoration of her own person. She had favourites too; she was
particularly fond of Pyotr Stepanovitch, who had recourse at times to
the grossest flattery in dealing with her. But she was attracted by him
for another reason, an amazing one, and most characteristic of the
poor lady: she was always hoping that he would reveal to her a regular
conspiracy against the government. Difficult as it is to imagine such
a thing, it really was the case. She fancied for some reason that there
must be a nihilist plot concealed in the province. By his silence at one
time and his hints at another Pyotr Stepanovitch did much to strengthen
this strange idea in her. She imagined that he was in communication with
every revolutionary element in Russia but at the same time passionately
devoted to her. To discover the plot, to receive the gratitude of the
government, to enter on a brilliant career, to influence the young "by
kindness," and to restrain them from extremes--all these dreams existed
side by side in her fantastic brain. She had saved Pyotr Stepanovitch,
she had conquered him (of this she was for some reason firmly
convinced); she would save others. None, none of them should perish,
she should save them all; she would pick them out; she would send in
the right report of them; she would act in the interests of the loftiest
justice, and perhaps posterity and Russian liberalism would bless her
name; yet the conspiracy would be discovered. Every advantage at once.

Still it was essential that Andrey Antonovitch should be in rather
better spirits before the festival. He must be cheered up and reassured.
For this purpose she sent Pyotr Stepanovitch to him in the hope that he
would relieve his depression by some means of consolation best known
to himself, perhaps by giving him some information, so to speak, first
hand. She put implicit faith in his dexterity.

It was some time since Pyotr Stepanovitch had been in Mr. von Lembke's
study. He popped in on him just when the sufferer was in a most stubborn
mood.


II

A combination of circumstances had arisen which Mr. von Lembke was quite
unable to deal with. In the very district where Pyotr Stepanovitch had
been having a festive time a sub-lieutenant had been called up to be
censured by his immediate superior, and the reproof was given in the
presence of the whole company. The sub-lieutenant was a young man fresh
from Petersburg, always silent and morose, of dignified appearance
though small, stout, and rosy-cheeked. He resented the reprimand and
suddenly, with a startling shriek that astonished the whole company,
he charged at his superior officer with his head bent down like a wild
beast's, struck him, and bit him on the shoulder with all his might;
they had difficulty in getting him off. There was no doubt that he had
gone out of his mind; anyway, it became known that of late he had been
observed performing incredibly strange actions. He had, for instance,
flung two ikons belonging to his landlady out of his lodgings and
smashed up one of them with an axe; in his own room he had, on three
stands resembling lecterns, laid out the works of Vogt, Moleschott, and
Buchner, and before each lectern he used to burn a church wax-candle.
From the number of books found in his rooms it could be gathered that
he was a well-read man. If he had had fifty thousand francs he would
perhaps have sailed to the island of Marquisas like the "cadet" to whom
Herzen alludes with such sprightly humour in one of his writings. When
he was seized, whole bundles of the most desperate manifestoes were
found in his pockets and his lodgings.

Manifestoes are a trivial matter too, and to my thinking not worth
troubling about. We have seen plenty of them. Besides, they were not
new manifestoes; they were, it was said later, just the same as had been
circulated in the X province, and Liputin, who had travelled in that
district and the neighbouring province six weeks previously, declared
that he had seen exactly the same leaflets there then. But what struck
Andrey Antonovitch most was that the overseer of Shpigulin's factory had
brought the police just at the same time two or three packets of exactly
the same leaflets as had been found on the lieutenant. The bundles,
which had been dropped in the factory in the night, had not been opened,
and none of the factory-hands had had time to read one of them. The
incident was a trivial one, but it set Andrey Antonovitch pondering
deeply. The position presented itself to him in an unpleasantly
complicated light.

In this factory the famous "Shpigulin scandal" was just then brewing,
which made so much talk among us and got into the Petersburg and Moscow
papers with all sorts of variations. Three weeks previously one of the
hands had fallen ill and died of Asiatic cholera; then several others
were stricken down. The whole town was in a panic, for the cholera was
coming nearer and nearer and had reached the neighbouring province.
I may observe that satisfactory sanitary measures had been, so far as
possible, taken to meet the unexpected guest. But the factory belonging
to the Shpigulins, who were millionaires and well-connected people, had
somehow been overlooked. And there was a sudden outcry from every one
that this factory was the hot-bed of infection, that the factory
itself, and especially the quarters inhabited by the workpeople, were
so inveterately filthy that even if cholera had not been in the
neighbourhood there might well have been an outbreak there. Steps were
immediately taken, of course, and Andrey Antonovitch vigorously insisted
on their being carried out without delay within three weeks. The factory
was cleansed, but the Shpigulins, for some unknown reason, closed it.
One of the Shpigulin brothers always lived in Petersburg and the other
went away to Moscow when the order was given for cleansing the factory.
The overseer proceeded to pay off the workpeople and, as it appeared,
cheated them shamelessly. The hands began to complain among themselves,
asking to be paid fairly, and foolishly went to the police, though
without much disturbance, for they were not so very much excited. It
was just at this moment that the manifestoes were brought to Andrey
Antonovitch by the overseer.

Pyotr Stepanovitch popped into the study unannounced, like an intimate
friend and one of the family; besides, he had a message from Yulia
Mihailovna. Seeing him, Lembke frowned grimly and stood still at the
table without welcoming him. Till that moment he had been pacing up and
down the study and had been discussing something _tête-à-tête_ with his
clerk Blum, a very clumsy and surly German whom he had brought with him
from Petersburg, in spite of the violent opposition of Yulia Mihailovna.
On Pyotr Stepanovitch's entrance the clerk had moved to the door, but
had not gone out. Pyotr Stepanovitch even fancied that he exchanged
significant glances with his chief.

"Aha, I've caught you at last, you secretive monarch of the town!" Pyotr
Stepanovitch cried out laughing, and laid his hand over the manifesto on
the table. "This increases your collection, eh?"

Andrey Antonovitch flushed crimson; his face seemed to twitch.

"Leave off, leave off at once!" he cried, trembling with rage. "And
don't you dare... sir..."

"What's the matter with you? You seem to be angry!"

"Allow me to inform you, sir, that I've no intention of putting up with
your _sans façon_ henceforward, and I beg you to remember..."

"Why, damn it all, he is in earnest!"

"Hold your tongue, hold your tongue"--Von Lembke stamped on the
carpet--"and don't dare..."

God knows what it might have come to. Alas, there was one circumstance
involved in the matter of which neither Pyotr Stepanovitch nor even
Yulia Mihailovna herself had any idea. The luckless Andrey Antonovitch
had been so greatly upset during the last few days that he had begun
to be secretly jealous of his wife and Pyotr Stepanovitch. In solitude,
especially at night, he spent some very disagreeable moments.

"Well, I imagined that if a man reads you his novel two days running
till after midnight and wants to hear your opinion of it, he has of his
own act discarded official relations, anyway.... Yulia Mihailovna treats
me as a friend; there's no making you out," Pyotr Stepanovitch brought
out, with a certain dignity indeed. "Here is your novel, by the way." He
laid on the table a large heavy manuscript rolled up in blue paper.

Lembke turned red and looked embarrassed.

"Where did you find it?" he asked discreetly, with a rush of joy which
he was unable to suppress, though he did his utmost to conceal it.

"Only fancy, done up like this, it rolled under the chest of drawers. I
must have thrown it down carelessly on the chest when I went out. It was
only found the day before yesterday, when the floor was scrubbed. You
did set me a task, though!"

Lembke dropped his eyes sternly.

"I haven't slept for the last two nights, thanks to you. It was found
the day before yesterday, but I kept it, and have been reading it ever
since. I've no time in the day, so I've read it at night. Well, I don't
like it; it's not my way of looking at things. But that's no matter;
I've never set up for being a critic, but I couldn't tear myself away
from it, my dear man, though I didn't like it! The fourth and fifth
chapters are... they really are... damn it all, they are beyond words!
And what a lot of humour you've packed into it; it made me laugh! How
you can make fun of things _sans que cela paraisse!_ As for the ninth
and tenth chapters, it's all about love; that's not my line, but it's
effective though. I was nearly blubbering over Egrenev's letter, though
you've shown him up so cleverly.... You know, it's touching, though at
the same time you want to show the false side of him, as it were, don't
you? Have I guessed right? But I could simply beat you for the ending.
For what are you setting up? Why, the same old idol of domestic
happiness, begetting children and making money; 'they were married and
lived happy ever afterwards'--come, it's too much! You will enchant your
readers, for even I couldn't put the book down; but that makes it all
the worse! The reading public is as stupid as ever, but it's the duty
of sensible people to wake them up, while you... But that's enough.
Good-bye. Don't be cross another time; I came in to you because I had a
couple of words to say to you, but you are so unaccountable..."

Andrey Antonovitch meantime took his novel and locked it up in an oak
bookcase, seizing the opportunity to wink to Blum to disappear. The
latter withdrew with a long, mournful face.

"I am not unaccountable, I am simply... nothing but annoyances," he
muttered, frowning but without anger, and sitting down to the table.
"Sit down and say what you have to say. It's a long time since I've seen
you, Pyotr Stepanovitch, only don't burst upon me in the future with
such manners... sometimes, when one has business, it's..."

"My manners are always the same...."

"I know, and I believe that you mean nothing by it, but sometimes one is
worried.... Sit down."

Pyotr Stepanovitch immediately lolled back on the sofa and drew his legs
under him.


III

"What sort of worries? Surely not these trifles?" He nodded towards the
manifesto. "I can bring you as many of them as you like; I made their
acquaintance in X province."

"You mean at the time you were staying there?"

"Of course, it was not in my absence. I remember there was a hatchet
printed at the top of it. Allow me." (He took up the manifesto.) "Yes,
there's the hatchet here too; that's it, the very same."

"Yes, here's a hatchet. You see, a hatchet."

"Well, is it the hatchet that scares you?"

"No, it's not... and I am not scared; but this business... it is a
business; there are circumstances."

"What sort? That it's come from the factory? He he! But do you know,
at that factory the workpeople will soon be writing manifestoes for
themselves."

"What do you mean?" Von Lembke stared at him severely.

"What I say. You've only to look at them. You are too soft, Andrey
Antonovitch; you write novels. But this has to be handled in the good
old way."

"What do you mean by the good old way? What do you mean by advising me?
The factory has been cleaned; I gave the order and they've cleaned it."

"And the workmen are in rebellion. They ought to be flogged, every one
of them; that would be the end of it."

"In rebellion? That's nonsense; I gave the order and they've cleaned
it."

"Ech, you are soft, Andrey Antonovitch!"

"In the first place, I am not so soft as you think, and in the second
place..." Von Lembke was piqued again. He had exerted himself to keep
up the conversation with the young man from curiosity, wondering if he
would tell him anything new.

"Ha ha, an old acquaintance again," Pyotr Stepanovitch interrupted,
pouncing on another document that lay under a paper-weight, something
like a manifesto, obviously printed abroad and in verse. "Oh, come, I
know this one by heart, 'A Noble Personality.' Let me have a look at
it--yes, 'A Noble Personality' it is. I made acquaintance with that
personality abroad. Where did you unearth it?"

"You say you've seen it abroad?" Von Lembke said eagerly.

"I should think so, four months ago, or may be five."

"You seem to have seen a great deal abroad." Von Lembke looked at him
subtly.

Pyotr Stepanovitch, not heeding him, unfolded the document and read the
poem aloud:

"A NOBLE PERSONALITY

     "He was not of rank exalted,
     He was not of noble birth,
     He was bred among the people
     In the breast of Mother Earth.
     But the malice of the nobles
     And the Tsar's revengeful wrath
     Drove him forth to grief and torture
     On the martyr's chosen path.
     He set out to teach the people
     Freedom, love, equality,
     To exhort them to resistance;
     But to flee the penalty
     Of the prison, whip and gallows,
     To a foreign land he went.
     While the people waited hoping
     From Smolensk to far Tashkent,
     Waited eager for his coming
     To rebel against their fate,
     To arise and crush the Tsardom
     And the nobles' vicious hate,
     To share all the wealth in common,
     And the antiquated thrall
     Of the church, the home and marriage
     To abolish once for all."

"You got it from that officer, I suppose, eh?" asked Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"Why, do you know that officer, then, too?"

"I should think so. I had a gay time with him there for two days; he was
bound to go out of his mind."

"Perhaps he did not go out of his mind."

"You think he didn't because he began to bite?"

"But, excuse me, if you saw those verses abroad and then, it appears, at
that officer's..."

"What, puzzling, is it? You are putting me through an examination,
Andrey Antonovitch, I see. You see," he began suddenly with
extraordinary dignity, "as to what I saw abroad I have already given
explanations, and my explanations were found satisfactory, otherwise I
should not have been gratifying this town with my presence. I consider
that the question as regards me has been settled, and I am not obliged
to give any further account of myself, not because I am an informer, but
because I could not help acting as I did. The people who wrote to Yulia
Mihailovna about me knew what they were talking about, and they said I
was an honest man.... But that's neither here nor there; I've come
to see you about a serious matter, and it's as well you've sent
your chimney-sweep away. It's a matter of importance to me, Andrey
Antonovitch. I shall have a very great favour to ask of you."

"A favour? H'm... by all means; I am waiting and, I confess, with
curiosity. And I must add, Pyotr Stepanovitch, that you surprise me not
a little."

Von Lembke was in some agitation. Pyotr Stepanovitch crossed his legs.

"In Petersburg," he began, "I talked freely of most things, but there
were things--this, for instance" (he tapped the "Noble Personality" with
his finger) "about which I held my tongue--in the first place, because
it wasn't worth talking about, and secondly, because I only answered
questions. I don't care to put myself forward in such matters; in that
I see the distinction between a rogue and an honest man forced by
circumstances. Well, in short, we'll dismiss that. But now... now that
these fools... now that this has come to the surface and is in your
hands, and I see that you'll find out all about it--for you are a man
with eyes and one can't tell beforehand what you'll do--and these fools
are still going on, I... I... well, the fact is, I've come to ask you
to save one man, a fool too, most likely mad, for the sake of his youth,
his misfortunes, in the name of your humanity.... You can't be so humane
only in the novels you manufacture!" he said, breaking off with coarse
sarcasm and impatience.

In fact, he was seen to be a straightforward man, awkward and
impolitic from excess of humane feeling and perhaps from excessive
sensitiveness--above all, a man of limited intelligence, as Von Lembke
saw at once with extraordinary subtlety. He had indeed long suspected
it, especially when during the previous week he had, sitting alone
in his study at night, secretly cursed him with all his heart for the
inexplicable way in which he had gained Yulia Mihailovna's good graces.

"For whom are you interceding, and what does all this mean?" he inquired
majestically, trying to conceal his curiosity.

"It... it's... damn it! It's not my fault that I trust you! Is it
my fault that I look upon you as a most honourable and, above all, a
sensible man... capable, that is, of understanding... damn..."

The poor fellow evidently could not master his emotion.

"You must understand at last," he went on, "you must understand that in
pronouncing his name I am betraying him to you--I am betraying him, am I
not? I am, am I not?"

"But how am I to guess if you don't make up your mind to speak out?"

"That's just it; you always cut the ground from under one's feet with
your logic, damn it.... Well, here goes... this 'noble personality,'
this 'student'... is Shatov... that's all."

"Shatov? How do you mean it's Shatov?"

"Shatov is the 'student' who is mentioned in this. He lives here, he was
once a serf, the man who gave that slap...."

"I know, I know." Lembke screwed up his eyes. "But excuse me, what is he
accused of? Precisely and, above all, what is your petition?"

"I beg you to save him, do you understand? I used to know him
eight years ago, I might almost say I was his friend," cried Pyotr
Stepanovitch, completely carried away. "But I am not bound to give you
an account of my past life," he added, with a gesture of dismissal. "All
this is of no consequence; it's the case of three men and a half, and
with those that are abroad you can't make up a dozen. But what I
am building upon is your humanity and your intelligence. You will
understand and you will put the matter in its true light, as the foolish
dream of a man driven crazy... by misfortunes, by continued misfortunes,
and not as some impossible political plot or God knows what!"

He was almost gasping for breath.

"H'm. I see that he is responsible for the manifestoes with the axe,"
Lembke concluded almost majestically. "Excuse me, though, if he were the
only person concerned, how could he have distributed it both here and
in other districts and in the X province... and, above all, where did he
get them?"

"But I tell you that at the utmost there are not more than five people
in it--a dozen perhaps. How can I tell?"

"You don't know?"

"How should I know?--damn it all."

"Why, you knew that Shatov was one of the conspirators."

"Ech!" Pyotr Stepanovitch waved his hand as though to keep off the
overwhelming penetration of the inquirer. "Well, listen. I'll tell you
the whole truth: of the manifestoes I know nothing--that is, absolutely
nothing. Damn it all, don't you know what nothing means?... That
sub-lieutenant, to be sure, and somebody else and some one else here...
and Shatov perhaps and some one else too--well, that's the lot of
them... a wretched lot.... But I've come to intercede for Shatov. He
must be saved, for this poem is his, his own composition, and it was
through him it was published abroad; that I know for a fact, but of the
manifestoes I really know nothing."

"If the poem is his work, no doubt the manifestoes are too. But what
data have you for suspecting Mr. Shatov?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch, with the air of a man driven out of all patience,
pulled a pocket-book out of his pocket and took a note out of it.

"Here are the facts," he cried, flinging it on the table.

Lembke unfolded it; it turned out to be a note written six months before
from here to some address abroad. It was a brief note, only two lines:

"I can't print 'A Noble Personality' here, and in fact I can do nothing;
print it abroad."

Lembke looked intently at Pyotr Stepanovitch. Varvara Petrovna had been
right in saying that he had at times the expression of a sheep.

"You see, it's like this," Pyotr Stepanovitch burst out. "He wrote this
poem here six months ago, but he couldn't get it printed here, in a
secret printing press, and so he asks to have it printed abroad.... That
seems clear."

"Yes, that's clear, but to whom did he write? That's not clear yet,"
Lembke observed with the most subtle irony.

"Why, Kirillov, of course; the letter was written to Kirillov
abroad.... Surely you knew that? What's so annoying is that perhaps you
are only putting it on before me, and most likely you knew all about
this poem and everything long ago! How did it come to be on your table?
It found its way there somehow! Why are you torturing me, if so?"

He feverishly mopped his forehead with his handkerchief.

"I know something, perhaps." Lembke parried dexterously. "But who is
this Kirillov?"

"An engineer who has lately come to the town. He was Stavrogin's second,
a maniac, a madman; your sub-lieutenant may really only be
suffering from temporary delirium, but Kirillov is a thoroughgoing
madman--thoroughgoing, that I guarantee. Ah, Andrey Antonovitch, if the
government only knew what sort of people these conspirators all are,
they wouldn't have the heart to lay a finger on them. Every single
one of them ought to be in an asylum; I had a good look at them in
Switzerland and at the congresses."

"From which they direct the movement here?"

"Why, who directs it? Three men and a half. It makes one sick to think
of them. And what sort of movement is there here? Manifestoes! And what
recruits have they made? Sub-lieutenants in brain fever and two or three
students! You are a sensible man: answer this question. Why don't
people of consequence join their ranks? Why are they all students and
half-baked boys of twenty-two? And not many of those. I dare say there
are thousands of bloodhounds on their track, but have they tracked out
many of them? Seven! I tell you it makes one sick."

Lembke listened with attention but with an expression that seemed to
say, "You don't feed nightingales on fairy-tales."

"Excuse me, though. You asserted that the letter was sent abroad, but
there's no address on it; how do you come to know that it was addressed
to Mr. Kirillov and abroad too and... and... that it really was written
by Mr. Shatov?"

"Why, fetch some specimen of Shatov's writing and compare it. You must
have some signature of his in your office. As for its being addressed to
Kirillov, it was Kirillov himself showed it me at the time."

"Then you were yourself..."

"Of course I was, myself. They showed me lots of things out there. And
as for this poem, they say it was written by Herzen to Shatov when he
was still wandering abroad, in memory of their meeting, so they say, by
way of praise and recommendation--damn it all... and Shatov circulates
it among the young people as much as to say, 'This was Herzen's opinion
of me.'

"Ha ha!" cried Lembke, feeling he had got to the bottom of it at last.
"That's just what I was wondering: one can understand the manifesto, but
what's the object of the poem?"

"Of course you'd see it. Goodness knows why I've been babbling to you.
Listen. Spare Shatov for me and the rest may go to the devil--even
Kirillov, who is in hiding now, shut up in Filipov's house, where Shatov
lodges too. They don't like me because I've turned round... but promise
me Shatov and I'll dish them all up for you. I shall be of use, Andrey
Antonovitch! I reckon nine or ten men make up the whole wretched lot. I
am keeping an eye on them myself, on my own account. We know of three
already: Shatov, Kirillov, and that sub-lieutenant. The others I am only
watching carefully... though I am pretty sharp-sighted too. It's the
same over again as it was in the X province: two students, a schoolboy,
two noblemen of twenty, a teacher, and a half-pay major of sixty, crazy
with drink, have been caught with manifestoes; that was all--you can
take my word for it, that was all; it was quite a surprise that that
was all. But I must have six days. I have reckoned it out--six days, not
less. If you want to arrive at any result, don't disturb them for six
days and I can kill all the birds with one stone for you; but if you
flutter them before, the birds will fly away. But spare me Shatov. I
speak for Shatov.... The best plan would be to fetch him here secretly,
in a friendly way, to your study and question him without disguising
the facts.... I have no doubt he'll throw himself at your feet and burst
into tears! He is a highly strung and unfortunate fellow; his wife
is carrying on with Stavrogin. Be kind to him and he will tell you
everything, but I must have six days.... And, above all, above all, not
a word to Yulia Mihailovna. It's a secret. May it be a secret?"

"What?" cried Lembke, opening wide his eyes. "Do you mean to say you
said nothing of this to Yulia Mihailovna?"

"To her? Heaven forbid! Ech, Andrey Antonovitch! You see, I value her
friendship and I have the highest respect for her... and all the rest of
it... but I couldn't make such a blunder. I don't contradict her, for,
as you know yourself, it's dangerous to contradict her. I may have
dropped a word to her, for I know she likes that, but to suppose that
I mentioned names to her as I have to you or anything of that sort! My
good sir! Why am I appealing to you? Because you are a man, anyway,
a serious person with old-fashioned firmness and experience in the
service. You've seen life. You must know by heart every detail of such
affairs, I expect, from what you've seen in Petersburg. But if I were
to mention those two names, for instance, to her, she'd stir up such a
hubbub.... You know, she would like to astonish Petersburg. No, she's
too hot-headed, she really is."

"Yes, she has something of that _fougue,_" Andrey Antonovitch muttered
with some satisfaction, though at the same time he resented this
unmannerly fellow's daring to express himself rather freely about Yulia
Mihailovna. But Pyotr Stepanovitch probably imagined that he had not
gone far enough and that he must exert himself further to flatter Lembke
and make a complete conquest of him.

"_Fougue_ is just it," he assented. "She may be a woman of genius, a
literary woman, but she would scare our sparrows. She wouldn't be
able to keep quiet for six hours, let alone six days. Ech, Andrey
Antonovitch, don't attempt to tie a woman down for six days! You do
admit that I have some experience--in this sort of thing, I mean; I know
something about it, and you know that I may very well know something
about it. I am not asking for six days for fun but with an object."

"I have heard..." (Lembke hesitated to utter his thought) "I have heard
that on your return from abroad you made some expression... as it were
of repentance, in the proper quarter?"

"Well, that's as it may be."

"And, of course, I don't want to go into it.... But it has seemed to
me all along that you've talked in quite a different style--about the
Christian faith, for instance, about social institutions, about the
government even...."

"I've said lots of things, no doubt, I am saying them still; but such
ideas mustn't be applied as those fools do it, that's the point. What's
the good of biting his superior's shoulder! You agreed with me yourself,
only you said it was premature."

"I didn't mean that when I agreed and said it was premature."

"You weigh every word you utter, though. He he! You are a careful man!"
Pyotr Stepanovitch observed gaily all of a sudden. "Listen, old friend.
I had to get to know you; that's why I talked in my own style. You are
not the only one I get to know like that. Maybe I needed to find out
your character."

"What's my character to you?"

"How can I tell what it may be to me?" He laughed again. "You see, my
dear and highly respected Andrey Antonovitch, you are cunning, but
it's not come to _that_ yet and it certainly never will come to it, you
understand? Perhaps you do understand. Though I did make an explanation
in the proper quarter when I came back from abroad, and I really don't
know why a man of certain convictions should not be able to work for
the advancement of his sincere convictions... but nobody _there_ has yet
instructed me to investigate your character and I've not undertaken any
such job from _them._ Consider: I need not have given those two names to
you. I might have gone straight _there;_ that is where I made my first
explanations. And if I'd been acting with a view to financial profit or
my own interest in any way, it would have been a bad speculation on my
part, for now they'll be grateful to you and not to me at headquarters.
I've done it solely for Shatov's sake," Pyotr Stepanovitch added
generously, "for Shatov's sake, because of our old friendship.... But
when you take up your pen to write to headquarters, you may put in
a word for me, if you like.... I'll make no objection, he he! _Adieu,_
though; I've stayed too long and there was no need to gossip so much!"
he added with some amiability, and he got up from the sofa.

"On the contrary, I am very glad that the position has been defined, so
to speak." Von Lembke too got up and he too looked pleasant, obviously
affected by the last words. "I accept your services and acknowledge
my obligation, and you may be sure that anything I can do by way of
reporting your zeal..."

"Six days--the great thing is to put it off for six days, and that you
shouldn't stir for those six days, that's what I want."

"So be it."

"Of course, I don't tie your hands and shouldn't venture to. You are
bound to keep watch, only don't flutter the nest too soon; I rely on
your sense and experience for that. But I should think you've plenty
of bloodhounds and trackers of your own in reserve, ha ha!" Pyotr
Stepanovitch blurted out with the gaiety and irresponsibility of youth.

"Not quite so." Lembke parried amiably. "Young people are apt to suppose
that there is a great deal in the background.... But, by the way, allow
me one little word: if this Kirillov was Stavrogin's second, then Mr.
Stavrogin too..."

"What about Stavrogin?"

"I mean, if they are such friends?"

"Oh, no, no, no! There you are quite out of it, though you are cunning.
You really surprise me. I thought that you had some information about
it.... H'm... Stavrogin--it's quite the opposite, quite.... _Avis au
lecteur."_

"Do you mean it? And can it be so?" Lembke articulated mistrustfully.
"Yulia Mihailovna told me that from what she heard from Petersburg he is
a man acting on some sort of instructions, so to speak...."

"I know nothing about it; I know nothing, absolutely nothing. _Adieu.
Avis au lecteur!_" Abruptly and obviously Pyotr Stepanovitch declined to
discuss it.

He hurried to the door.

"Stay, Pyotr Stepanovitch, stay," cried Lembke. "One other tiny matter
and I won't detain you."

He drew an envelope out of a table drawer.

"Here is a little specimen of the same kind of thing, and I let you see
it to show how completely I trust you. Here, and tell me your opinion."

In the envelope was a letter, a strange anonymous letter addressed to
Lembke and only received by him the day before. With intense vexation
Pyotr Stepanovitch read as follows:

"Your excellency,--For such you are by rank. Herewith I make known that
there is an attempt to be made on the life of personages of general's
rank and on the Fatherland. For it's working up straight for that.
I myself have been disseminating unceasingly for a number of years.
There's infidelity too. There's a rebellion being got up and there are
some thousands of manifestoes, and for every one of them there will be
a hundred running with their tongues out, unless they've been taken
away beforehand by the police. For they've been promised a mighty lot of
benefits, and the simple people are foolish, and there's vodka too. The
people will attack one after another, taking them to be guilty, and,
fearing both sides, I repent of what I had no share in, my circumstances
being what they are. If you want information to save the Fatherland,
and also the Church and the ikons, I am the only one that can do it. But
only on condition that I get a pardon from the Secret Police by telegram
at once, me alone, but the rest may answer for it. Put a candle every
evening at seven o'clock in the porter's window for a signal. Seeing it,
I shall believe and come to kiss the merciful hand from Petersburg. But
on condition there's a pension for me, for else how am I to live? You
won't regret it for it will mean a star for you. You must go secretly
or they'll wring your neck. Your excellency's desperate servant falls at
your feet.

"Repentant free-thinker incognito."


Von Lembke explained that the letter had made its appearance in the
porter's room when it was left empty the day before.

"So what do you think?" Pyotr Stepanovitch asked almost rudely.

"I think it's an anonymous skit by way of a hoax."

"Most likely it is. There's no taking you in."

"What makes me think that is that it's so stupid."

"Have you received such documents here before?"

"Once or twice, anonymous letters."

"Oh, of course they wouldn't be signed. In a different style? In
different handwritings?"

"Yes."

"And were they buffoonery like this one?"

"Yes, and you know... very disgusting."

"Well, if you had them before, it must be the same thing now."

"Especially because it's so stupid. Because these people are educated
and wouldn't write so stupidly."

"Of course, of course."

"But what if this is some one who really wants to turn informer?"

"It's not very likely," Pyotr Stepanovitch rapped out dryly. "What
does he mean by a telegram from the Secret Police and a pension? It's
obviously a hoax."

"Yes, yes," Lembke admitted, abashed.

"I tell you what: you leave this with me. I can certainly find out for
you before I track out the others."

"Take it," Lembke assented, though with some hesitation.

"Have you shown it to anyone?"

"Is it likely! No."

"Not to Yulia Mihailovna?"

"Oh, Heaven forbid! And for God's sake don't you show it her!" Lembke
cried in alarm. "She'll be so upset... and will be dreadfully angry with
me."

"Yes, you'll be the first to catch it; she'd say you brought it on
yourself if people write like that to you. I know what women's logic is.
Well, good-bye. I dare say I shall bring you the writer in a couple of
days or so. Above all, our compact!"


IV

Though Pyotr Stepanovitch was perhaps far from being a stupid man, Fedka
the convict had said of him truly "that he would make up a man himself
and go on living with him too." He came away from Lembke fully persuaded
that for the next six days, anyway, he had put his mind at rest, and
this interval was absolutely necessary for his own purposes. But it was
a false idea and founded entirely on the fact that he had made up for
himself once for all an Andrey Antonovitch who was a perfect simpleton.

Like every morbidly suspicious man, Andrey Antonovitch was always
exceedingly and joyfully trustful the moment he got on to sure ground.
The new turn of affairs struck him at first in a rather favourable light
in spite of some fresh and troublesome complications. Anyway, his former
doubts fell to the ground. Besides, he had been so tired for the last
few days, so exhausted and helpless, that his soul involuntarily yearned
for rest. But alas! he was again uneasy. The long time he had spent in
Petersburg had left ineradicable traces in his heart. The official and
even the secret history of the "younger generation" was fairly familiar
to him--he was a curious man and used to collect manifestoes--but he
could never understand a word of it. Now he felt like a man lost in
a forest. Every instinct told him that there was something in Pyotr
Stepanovitch's words utterly incongruous, anomalous, and grotesque,
"though there's no telling what may not happen with this 'younger
generation,' and the devil only knows what's going on among them," he
mused, lost in perplexity.

And at this moment, to make matters worse, Blum poked his head in. He
had been waiting not far off through the whole of Pyotr Stepanovitch's
visit. This Blum was actually a distant relation of Andrey Antonovitch,
though the relationship had always been carefully and timorously
concealed. I must apologise to the reader for devoting a few words here
to this insignificant person. Blum was one of that strange class of
"unfortunate" Germans who are unfortunate not through lack of ability
but through some inexplicable ill luck. "Unfortunate" Germans are not
a myth, but really do exist even in Russia, and are of a special type.
Andrey Antonovitch had always had a quite touching sympathy for him, and
wherever he could, as he rose himself in the service, had promoted him
to subordinate positions under him; but Blum had never been successful.
Either the post was abolished after he had been appointed to it, or a
new chief took charge of the department; once he was almost arrested by
mistake with other people. He was precise, but he was gloomy to excess
and to his own detriment. He was tall and had red hair; he stooped and
was depressed and even sentimental; and in spite of his being humbled by
his life, he was obstinate and persistent as an ox, though always at
the wrong moment. For Andrey Antonovitch he, as well as his wife and
numerous family, had cherished for many years a reverent devotion.
Except Andrey Antonovitch no one had ever liked him. Yulia Mihailovna
would have discarded him from the first, but could not overcome her
husband's obstinacy. It was the cause of their first conjugal quarrel.
It had happened soon after their marriage, in the early days of their
honeymoon, when she was confronted with Blum, who, together with the
humiliating secret of his relationship, had been until then carefully
concealed from her. Andrey Antonovitch besought her with clasped hands,
told her pathetically all the story of Blum and their friendship from
childhood, but Yulia Mihailovna considered herself disgraced for ever,
and even had recourse to fainting. Von Lembke would not budge an
inch, and declared that he would not give up Blum or part from him for
anything in the world, so that she was surprised at last and was obliged
to put up with Blum. It was settled, however, that the relationship
should be concealed even more carefully than before if possible, and
that even Blum's Christian name and patronymic should be changed,
because he too was for some reason called Andrey Antonovitch. Blum knew
no one in the town except the German chemist, had not called on anyone,
and led, as he always did, a lonely and niggardly existence. He had
long been aware of Andrey Antonovitch's literary peccadilloes. He was
generally summoned to listen to secret _tête-à-tête_ readings of his
novel; he would sit like a post for six hours at a stretch, perspiring
and straining his utmost to keep awake and smile. On reaching home he
would groan with his long-legged and lanky wife over their benefactor's
unhappy weakness for Russian literature.

Andrey Antonovitch looked with anguish at Blum.

"I beg you to leave me alone, Blum," he began with agitated haste,
obviously anxious to avoid any renewal of the previous conversation
which had been interrupted by Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"And yet this may be arranged in the most delicate way and with no
publicity; you have full power." Blum respectfully but obstinately
insisted on some point, stooping forward and coming nearer and nearer by
small steps to Andrey Antonovitch.

"Blum, you are so devoted to me and so anxious to serve me that I am
always in a panic when I look at you."

"You always say witty things, and sleep in peace satisfied with what
you've said, but that's how you damage yourself."

"Blum, I have just convinced myself that it's quite a mistake, quite a
mistake."

"Not from the words of that false, vicious young man whom you suspect
yourself? He has won you by his flattering praise of your talent for
literature."

"Blum, you understand nothing about it; your project is absurd, I
tell you. We shall find nothing and there will be a fearful upset and
laughter too, and then Yulia Mihailovna..."

"We shall certainly find everything we are looking for." Blum advanced
firmly towards him, laying his right hand on his heart. "We will make
a search suddenly early in the morning, carefully showing every
consideration for the person himself and strictly observing all the
prescribed forms of the law. The young men, Lyamshin and Telyatnikov,
assert positively that we shall find all we want. They were constant
visitors there. Nobody is favourably disposed to Mr. Verhovensky. Madame
Stavrogin has openly refused him her graces, and every honest man, if
only there is such a one in this coarse town, is persuaded that a hotbed
of infidelity and social doctrines has always been concealed there. He
keeps all the forbidden books, Ryliev's 'Reflections,' all Herzen's
works.... I have an approximate catalogue, in case of need."

"Oh heavens! Every one has these books; how simple you are, my poor
Blum."

"And many manifestoes," Blum went on without heeding the observation.
"We shall end by certainly coming upon traces of the real manifestoes
here. That young Verhovensky I feel very suspicious of."

"But you are mixing up the father and the son. They are not on good
terms. The son openly laughs at his father."

"That's only a mask."

"Blum, you've sworn to torment me! Think! he is a conspicuous figure
here, after all. He's been a professor, he is a well-known man. He'll
make such an uproar and there will be such gibes all over the town, and
we shall make a mess of it all.... And only think how Yulia Mihailovna
will take it." Blum pressed forward and did not listen. "He was only a
lecturer, only a lecturer, and of a low rank when he retired." He smote
himself on the chest. "He has no marks of distinction. He was discharged
from the service on suspicion of plots against the government. He has
been under secret supervision, and undoubtedly still is so. And in view
of the disorders that have come to light now, you are undoubtedly bound
in duty. You are losing your chance of distinction by letting slip the
real criminal."

"Yulia Mihailovna! Get away, Blum," Von Lembke cried suddenly, hearing
the voice of his spouse in the next room. Blum started but did not give
in.

"Allow me, allow me," he persisted, pressing both hands still more
tightly on his chest.

"Get away!" hissed Andrey Antonovitch. "Do what you like... afterwards.
Oh, my God!"

The curtain was raised and Yulia Mihailovna made her appearance. She
stood still majestically at the sight of Blum, casting a haughty and
offended glance at him, as though the very presence of this man was an
affront to her. Blum respectfully made her a deep bow without speaking
and, doubled up with veneration, moved towards the door on tiptoe with
his arms held a little away from him.

Either because he really took Andrey Antonovitch's last hysterical
outbreak as a direct permission to act as he was asking, or whether
he strained a point in this case for the direct advantage of his
benefactor, because he was too confident that success would crown his
efforts; anyway, as we shall see later on, this conversation of the
governor with his subordinate led to a very surprising event which
amused many people, became public property, moved Yulia Mihailovna to
fierce anger, utterly disconcerting Andrey Antonovitch and reducing him
at the crucial moment to a state of deplorable indecision.

V

It was a busy day for Pyotr Stepanovitch. From Von Lembke he hastened to
Bogoyavlensky Street, but as he went along Bykovy Street, past the house
where Karmazinov was staying, he suddenly stopped, grinned, and
went into the house. The servant told him that he was expected, which
interested him, as he had said nothing beforehand of his coming.

But the great writer really had been expecting him, not only that day
but the day before and the day before that. Three days before he had
handed him his manuscript _Merci_ (which he had meant to read at the
literary matinée at Yulia Mihailovna's fête). He had done this out of
amiability, fully convinced that he was agreeably flattering the young
man's vanity by letting him read the great work beforehand. Pyotr
Stepanovitch had noticed long before that this vainglorious, spoiled
gentleman, who was so offensively unapproachable for all but the elect,
this writer "with the intellect of a statesman," was simply trying
to curry favour with him, even with avidity. I believe the young man
guessed at last that Karmazinov considered him, if not the leader of
the whole secret revolutionary movement in Russia, at least one of those
most deeply initiated into the secrets of the Russian revolution who had
an incontestable influence on the younger generation. The state of mind
of "the cleverest man in Russia" interested Pyotr Stepanovitch, but
hitherto he had, for certain reasons, avoided explaining himself.

The great writer was staying in the house belonging to his sister, who
was the wife of a _kammerherr_ and had an estate in the neighbourhood.
Both she and her husband had the deepest reverence for their illustrious
relation, but to their profound regret both of them happened to be in
Moscow at the time of his visit, so that the honour of receiving him
fell to the lot of an old lady, a poor relation of the _kammerherr's,_ who
had for years lived in the family and looked after the housekeeping. All
the household had moved about on tiptoe since Karmazinov's arrival. The
old lady sent news to Moscow almost every day, how he had slept, what he
had deigned to eat, and had once sent a telegram to announce that after
a dinner-party at the mayor's he was obliged to take a spoonful of a
well-known medicine. She rarely plucked up courage to enter his room,
though he behaved courteously to her, but dryly, and only talked to her
of what was necessary.

When Pyotr Stepanovitch came in, he was eating his morning cutlet with
half a glass of red wine. Pyotr Stepanovitch had been to see him before
and always found him eating this cutlet, which he finished in his
presence without ever offering him anything. After the cutlet a little
cup of coffee was served. The footman who brought in the dishes wore a
swallow-tail coat, noiseless boots, and gloves.

"Ha ha!" Karmazinov got up from the sofa, wiping his mouth with a
table-napkin, and came forward to kiss him with an air of unmixed
delight--after the characteristic fashion of Russians if they are very
illustrious. But Pyotr Stepanovitch knew by experience that, though
Karmazinov made a show of kissing him, he really only proffered his
cheek, and so this time he did the same: the cheeks met. Karmazinov did
not show that he noticed it, sat down on the sofa, and affably offered
Pyotr Stepanovitch an easy chair facing him, in which the latter
stretched himself at once.

"You don't... wouldn't like some lunch?" inquired Karmazinov, abandoning
his usual habit but with an air, of course, which would prompt a polite
refusal. Pyotr Stepanovitch at once expressed a desire for lunch. A
shade of offended surprise darkened the face of his host, but only for
an instant; he nervously rang for the servant and, in spite of all his
breeding, raised his voice scornfully as he gave orders for a second
lunch to be served.

"What will you have, cutlet or coffee?" he asked once more.

"A cutlet and coffee, and tell him to bring some more wine, I am
hungry," answered Pyotr Stepanovitch, calmly scrutinising his host's
attire. Mr. Karmazinov was wearing a sort of indoor wadded jacket with
pearl buttons, but it was too short, which was far from becoming to his
rather comfortable stomach and the solid curves of his hips. But tastes
differ. Over his knees he had a checkered woollen plaid reaching to the
floor, though it was warm in the room.

"Are you unwell?" commented Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"No, not unwell, but I am afraid of being so in this climate," answered
the writer in his squeaky voice, though he uttered each word with a soft
cadence and agreeable gentlemanly lisp. "I've been expecting you since
yesterday."

"Why? I didn't say I'd come."

"No, but you have my manuscript. Have you... read it?"

"Manuscript? Which one?"

Karmazinov was terribly surprised.

"But you've brought it with you, haven't you?" He was so disturbed that
he even left off eating and looked at Pyotr Stepanovitch with a face of
dismay.

"Ah, that _Bonjour_ you mean...."

_"Merci."_
