shoulders, she gazed for a while into my face, as though trying to read
it--something I said to her, but it was clear that she did not hear it.
Her face looked so dark and despondent that I began to fear for her
reason. At length she drew me towards herself--a trustful smile playing
over her features; and then, as suddenly, she pushed me away again as
she eyed me dimly.

Finally she threw herself upon me in an embrace.

"You love me?" she said. "DO you?--you who were willing even to quarrel
with the Baron at my bidding?"

Then she laughed--laughed as though something dear, but laughable, had
recurred to her memory. Yes, she laughed and wept at the same time.
What was I to do? I was like a man in a fever. I remember that she
began to say something to me--though WHAT I do not know, since she
spoke with a feverish lisp, as though she were trying to tell me
something very quickly. At intervals, too, she would break off into the
smile which I was beginning to dread. "No, no!" she kept repeating.
"YOU are my dear one; YOU are the man I trust." Again she laid her
hands upon my shoulders, and again she gazed at me as she reiterated:
"You love me, you love me? Will you ALWAYS love me?" I could not take
my eyes off her. Never before had I seen her in this mood of humility
and affection. True, the mood was the outcome of hysteria; but--! All
of a sudden she noticed my ardent gaze, and smiled slightly. The next
moment, for no apparent reason, she began to talk of Astley.

She continued talking and talking about him, but I could not make out
all she said--more particularly when she was endeavouring to tell me of
something or other which had happened recently. On the whole, she
appeared to be laughing at Astley, for she kept repeating that he was
waiting for her, and did I know whether, even at that moment, he was
not standing beneath the window? "Yes, yes, he is there," she said.
"Open the window, and see if he is not." She pushed me in that
direction; yet, no sooner did I make a movement to obey her behest than
she burst into laughter, and I remained beside her, and she embraced me.

"Shall we go away tomorrow?" presently she asked, as though some
disturbing thought had recurred to her recollection. "How would it be
if we were to try and overtake Grandmamma? I think we should do so at
Berlin. And what think you she would have to say to us when we caught
her up, and her eyes first lit upon us? What, too, about Mr. Astley? HE
would not leap from the Shlangenberg for my sake! No! Of that I am very
sure!"--and she laughed. "Do you know where he is going next year? He
says he intends to go to the North Pole for scientific investigations,
and has invited me to go with him! Ha, ha, ha! He also says that we
Russians know nothing, can do nothing, without European help. But he is
a good fellow all the same. For instance, he does not blame the General
in the matter, but declares that Mlle. Blanche--that love--But no; I do
not know, I do not know." She stopped suddenly, as though she had said
her say, and was feeling bewildered. "What poor creatures these people
are. How sorry I am for them, and for Grandmamma! But when are you
going to kill De Griers? Surely you do not intend actually to murder
him? You fool! Do you suppose that I should ALLOW you to fight De
Griers? Nor shall you kill the Baron." Here she burst out laughing.
"How absurd you looked when you were talking to the Burmergelms! I was
watching you all the time--watching you from where I was sitting. And
how unwilling you were to go when I sent you! Oh, how I laughed and
laughed!"

Then she kissed and embraced me again; again she pressed her face to
mine with tender passion. Yet I neither saw nor heard her, for my head
was in a whirl....

It must have been about seven o'clock in the morning when I awoke.
Daylight had come, and Polina was sitting by my side--a strange
expression on her face, as though she had seen a vision and was unable
to collect her thoughts. She too had just awoken, and was now staring
at the money on the table. My head ached; it felt heavy. I attempted to
take Polina's hand, but she pushed me from her, and leapt from the
sofa. The dawn was full of mist, for rain had fallen, yet she moved to
the window, opened it, and, leaning her elbows upon the window-sill,
thrust out her head and shoulders to take the air. In this position did
she remain for several minutes, without ever looking round at me, or
listening to what I was saying. Into my head there came the uneasy
thought: What is to happen now? How is it all to end? Suddenly Polina
rose from the window, approached the table, and, looking at me with an
expression of infinite aversion, said with lips which quivered with
anger:

"Well? Are you going to hand me over my fifty thousand francs?"

"Polina, you say that AGAIN, AGAIN?" I exclaimed.

"You have changed your mind, then? Ha, ha, ha! You are sorry you ever
promised them?"

On the table where, the previous night, I had counted the money there
still was lying the packet of twenty five thousand florins. I handed it
to her.

"The francs are mine, then, are they? They are mine?" she inquired
viciously as she balanced the money in her hands.

"Yes; they have ALWAYS been yours," I said.

"Then TAKE your fifty thousand francs!" and she hurled them full in my
face. The packet burst as she did so, and the floor became strewed with
bank-notes. The instant that the deed was done she rushed from the room.

At that moment she cannot have been in her right mind; yet, what was
the cause of her temporary aberration I cannot say. For a month past
she had been unwell. Yet what had brought about this PRESENT condition
of mind, above all things, this outburst? Had it come of wounded pride?
Had it come of despair over her decision to come to me? Had it come of
the fact that, presuming too much on my good fortune, I had seemed to
be intending to desert her (even as De Griers had done) when once I had
given her the fifty thousand francs? But, on my honour, I had never
cherished any such intention. What was at fault, I think, was her own
pride, which kept urging her not to trust me, but, rather, to insult
me--even though she had not realised the fact. In her eyes I
corresponded to De Griers, and therefore had been condemned for a fault
not wholly my own. Her mood of late had been a sort of delirium, a sort
of light-headedness--that I knew full well; yet, never had I
sufficiently taken it into consideration. Perhaps she would not pardon
me now? Ah, but this was THE PRESENT. What about the future? Her
delirium and sickness were not likely to make her forget what she had
done in bringing me De Griers' letter. No, she must have known what she
was doing when she brought it.

Somehow I contrived to stuff the pile of notes and gold under the bed,
to cover them over, and then to leave the room some ten minutes after
Polina. I felt sure that she had returned to her own room; wherefore, I
intended quietly to follow her, and to ask the nursemaid aid who opened
the door how her mistress was. Judge, therefore, of my surprise when,
meeting the domestic on the stairs, she informed me that Polina had not
yet returned, and that she (the domestic) was at that moment on her way
to my room in quest of her!

"Mlle. left me but ten minutes ago," I said. "What can have become of
her?" The nursemaid looked at me reproachfully.

Already sundry rumours were flying about the hotel. Both in the office
of the commissionaire and in that of the landlord it was whispered
that, at seven o'clock that morning, the Fraulein had left the hotel,
and set off, despite the rain, in the direction of the Hotel
d'Angleterre. From words and hints let fall I could see that the fact
of Polina having spent the night in my room was now public property.
Also, sundry rumours were circulating concerning the General's family
affairs. It was known that last night he had gone out of his mind, and
paraded the hotel in tears; also, that the old lady who had arrived was
his mother, and that she had come from Russia on purpose to forbid her
son's marriage with Mlle. de Cominges, as well as to cut him out of her
will if he should disobey her; also that, because he had disobeyed her,
she had squandered all her money at roulette, in order to have nothing
more to leave to him. "Oh, these Russians!" exclaimed the landlord,
with an angry toss of the head, while the bystanders laughed and the
clerk betook himself to his accounts. Also, every one had learnt about
my winnings; Karl, the corridor lacquey, was the first to congratulate
me. But with these folk I had nothing to do. My business was to set off
at full speed to the Hotel d'Angleterre.

As yet it was early for Mr. Astley to receive visitors; but, as soon as
he learnt that it was I who had arrived, he came out into the corridor
to meet me, and stood looking at me in silence with his steel-grey eyes
as he waited to hear what I had to say. I inquired after Polina.

"She is ill," he replied, still looking at me with his direct,
unwavering glance.

"And she is in your rooms."

"Yes, she is in my rooms."

"Then you are minded to keep her there?"

"Yes, I am minded to keep her there."

"But, Mr. Astley, that will raise a scandal. It ought not to be
allowed. Besides, she is very ill. Perhaps you had not remarked that?"

"Yes, I have. It was I who told you about it. Had she not been ill, she
would not have gone and spent the night with you."

"Then you know all about it?"

"Yes; for last night she was to have accompanied me to the house of a
relative of mine. Unfortunately, being ill, she made a mistake, and
went to your rooms instead."

"Indeed? Then I wish you joy, Mr. Astley. Apropos, you have reminded me
of something. Were you beneath my window last night? Every moment Mlle.
Polina kept telling me to open the window and see if you were there;
after which she always smiled."

"Indeed? No, I was not there; but I was waiting in the corridor, and
walking about the hotel."

"She ought to see a doctor, you know, Mr. Astley."

"Yes, she ought. I have sent for one, and, if she dies, I shall hold
you responsible."

This surprised me.

"Pardon me," I replied, "but what do you mean?"

"Never mind. Tell me if it is true that, last night, you won two
hundred thousand thalers?"

"No; I won a hundred thousand florins."

"Good heavens! Then I suppose you will be off to Paris this morning?

"Why?"

"Because all Russians who have grown rich go to Paris," explained
Astley, as though he had read the fact in a book.

"But what could I do in Paris in summer time?--I LOVE her, Mr. Astley!
Surely you know that?"

"Indeed? I am sure that you do NOT. Moreover, if you were to stay here,
you would lose everything that you possess, and have nothing left with
which to pay your expenses in Paris. Well, good-bye now. I feel sure
that today will see you gone from here."

"Good-bye. But I am NOT going to Paris. Likewise--pardon me--what is to
become of this family? I mean that the affair of the General and Mlle.
Polina will soon be all over the town."

"I daresay; yet, I hardly suppose that that will break the General's
heart. Moreover, Mlle. Polina has a perfect right to live where she
chooses. In short, we may say that, as a family, this family has ceased
to exist."

I departed, and found myself smiling at the Englishman's strange
assurance that I should soon be leaving for Paris. "I suppose he means
to shoot me in a duel, should Polina die. Yes, that is what he intends
to do."  Now, although I was honestly sorry for Polina, it is a fact
that, from the moment when, the previous night, I had approached the
gaming-table, and begun to rake in the packets of bank-notes, my love
for her had entered upon a new plane. Yes, I can say that now;
although, at the time, I was barely conscious of it. Was I, then, at
heart a gambler? Did I, after all, love Polina not so very much? No,
no! As God is my witness, I loved her! Even when I was returning home
from Mr. Astley's my suffering was genuine, and my self-reproach
sincere. But presently I was to go through an exceedingly strange and
ugly experience.

I was proceeding to the General's rooms when I heard a door near me
open, and a voice call me by name. It was Mlle.'s mother, the Widow de
Cominges who was inviting me, in her daughter's name, to enter.

I did so; whereupon, I heard a laugh and a little cry proceed from the
bedroom (the pair occupied a suite of two apartments), where Mlle.
Blanche was just arising.

"Ah, c'est lui! Viens, donc, bete! Is it true that you have won a
mountain of gold and silver? J'aimerais mieux l'or."

"Yes," I replied with a smile.

"How much?"

"A hundred thousand florins."

"Bibi, comme tu es bete! Come in here, for I can't hear you where you
are now. Nous ferons bombance, n'est-ce pas?"

Entering her room, I found her lolling under a pink satin coverlet, and
revealing a pair of swarthy, wonderfully healthy shoulders--shoulders
such as one sees in dreams--shoulders covered over with a white cambric
nightgown which, trimmed with lace, stood out, in striking relief,
against the darkness of her skin.

"Mon fils, as-tu du coeur?" she cried when she saw me, and then
giggled. Her laugh had always been a very cheerful one, and at times it
even sounded sincere.

"Tout autre--" I began, paraphrasing Corneille.

"See here," she prattled on. "Please search for my stockings, and help
me to dress. Aussi, si tu n'es pas trop bete je te prends a Paris. I am
just off, let me tell you."

"This moment?"

"In half an hour."

True enough, everything stood ready-packed--trunks, portmanteaux, and
all. Coffee had long been served.

"Eh bien, tu verras Paris. Dis donc, qu'est-ce que c'est qu'un
'utchitel'? Tu etais bien bete quand tu etais 'utchitel.' Where are my
stockings? Please help me to dress."

And she lifted up a really ravishing foot--small, swarthy, and not
misshapen like the majority of feet which look dainty only in bottines.
I laughed, and started to draw on to the foot a silk stocking, while
Mlle. Blanche sat on the edge of the bed and chattered.

"Eh bien, que feras-tu si je te prends avec moi? First of all I must
have fifty thousand francs, and you shall give them to me at Frankfurt.
Then we will go on to Paris, where we will live together, et je te
ferai voir des etoiles en plein jour. Yes, you shall see such women as
your eyes have never lit upon."

"Stop a moment. If I were to give you those fifty thousand francs, what
should I have left for myself?"

"Another hundred thousand francs, please to remember. Besides, I could
live with you in your rooms for a month, or even for two; or even for
longer. But it would not take us more than two months to get through
fifty thousand francs; for, look you, je suis bonne enfante, et tu
verras des etoiles, you may be sure."

"What? You mean to say that we should spend the whole in two months?"

"Certainly. Does that surprise you very much? Ah, vil esclave! Why, one
month of that life would be better than all your previous existence.
One month--et apres, le deluge! Mais tu ne peux comprendre. Va! Away,
away! You are not worth it.--Ah, que fais-tu?"

For, while drawing on the other stocking, I had felt constrained to
kiss her. Immediately she shrunk back, kicked me in the face with her
toes, and turned me neck and prop out of the room.

"Eh bien, mon 'utchitel'," she called after me, "je t'attends, si tu
veux. I start in a quarter of an hour's time."

I returned to my own room with my head in a whirl. It was not my fault
that Polina had thrown a packet in my face, and preferred Mr. Astley to
myself. A few bank-notes were still fluttering about the floor, and I
picked them up. At that moment the door opened, and the landlord
appeared--a person who, until now, had never bestowed upon me so much
as a glance. He had come to know if I would prefer to move to a lower
floor--to a suite which had just been tenanted by Count V.

For a moment I reflected.

"No!" I shouted. "My account, please, for in ten minutes I shall be
gone."

"To Paris, to Paris!" I added to myself. "Every man of birth must make
her acquaintance."

Within a quarter of an hour all three of us were seated in a family
compartment--Mlle. Blanche, the Widow de Cominges, and myself. Mlle.
kept laughing hysterically as she looked at me, and Madame re-echoed
her; but I did not feel so cheerful. My life had broken in two, and
yesterday had infected me with a habit of staking my all upon a card.
Although it might be that I had failed to win my stake, that I had lost
my senses, that I desired nothing better, I felt that the scene was to
be changed only FOR A TIME. "Within a month from now," I kept thinking
to myself, "I shall be back again in Roulettenberg; and THEN I mean to
have it out with you, Mr. Astley!" Yes, as now I look back at things, I
remember that I felt greatly depressed, despite the absurd gigglings of
the egregious Blanche.

"What is the matter with you? How dull you are!" she cried at length as
she interrupted her laughter to take me seriously to task.

"Come, come! We are going to spend your two hundred thousand francs for
you, et tu seras heureux comme un petit roi. I myself will tie your tie
for you, and introduce you to Hortense. And when we have spent your
money you shall return here, and break the bank again. What did those
two Jews tell you?--that the thing most needed is daring, and that you
possess it? Consequently, this is not the first time that you will be
hurrying to Paris with money in your pocket. Quant ... moi, je veux
cinquante mille francs de rente, et alors."

"But what about the General?" I interrupted.

"The General? You know well enough that at about this hour every day he
goes to buy me a bouquet. On this occasion, I took care to tell him
that he must hunt for the choicest of flowers; and when he returns
home, the poor fellow will find the bird flown. Possibly he may take
wing in pursuit--ha, ha, ha! And if so, I shall not be sorry, for he
could be useful to me in Paris, and Mr. Astley will pay his debts here."

In this manner did I depart for the Gay City.



XVI

Of Paris what am I to say? The whole proceeding was a delirium, a
madness. I spent a little over three weeks there, and, during that
time, saw my hundred thousand francs come to an end. I speak only of
the ONE hundred thousand francs, for the other hundred thousand I gave
to Mlle. Blanche in pure cash. That is to say, I handed her fifty
thousand francs at Frankfurt, and, three days later (in Paris),
advanced her another fifty thousand on note of hand. Nevertheless, a
week had not elapsed ere she came to me for more money. "Et les cent
mille francs qui nous restent," she added, "tu les mangeras avec moi,
mon utchitel." Yes, she always called me her "utchitel." A person more
economical, grasping, and mean than Mlle. Blanche one could not
imagine. But this was only as regards HER OWN money. MY hundred
thousand francs (as she explained to me later) she needed to set up her
establishment in Paris, "so that once and for all I may be on a decent
footing, and proof against any stones which may be thrown at me--at all
events for a long time to come." Nevertheless, I saw nothing of those
hundred thousand francs, for my own purse (which she inspected daily)
never managed to amass in it more than a hundred francs at a time; and,
generally the sum did not reach even that figure.

"What do you want with money?" she would say to me with air of absolute
simplicity; and I never disputed the point. Nevertheless, though she
fitted out her flat very badly with the money, the fact did not prevent
her from saying when, later, she was showing me over the rooms of her
new abode:  "See what care and taste can do with the most wretched of
means!" However, her "wretchedness" had cost fifty thousand francs,
while with the remaining fifty thousand she purchased a carriage and
horses.

Also, we gave a couple of balls--evening parties attended by Hortense
and Lisette and Cleopatre, who were women remarkable both for the
number of their liaisons and (though only in some cases) for their good
looks. At these reunions I had to play the part of host--to meet and
entertain fat mercantile parvenus who were impossible by reason of
their rudeness and braggadocio, colonels of various kinds, hungry
authors, and journalistic hacks--all of whom disported themselves in
fashionable tailcoats and pale yellow gloves, and displayed such an
aggregate of conceit and gasconade as would be unthinkable even in St.
Petersburg--which is saying a great deal! They used to try to make fun
of me, but I would console myself by drinking champagne and then
lolling in a retiring-room. Nevertheless, I found it deadly work.
"C'est un utchitel," Blanche would say of me, "qui a gagne deux cent
mille francs, and but for me, would have had not a notion how to spend
them. Presently he will have to return to his tutoring. Does any one
know of a vacant post? You know, one must do something for him."

I had the more frequent recourse to champagne in that I constantly felt
depressed and bored, owing to the fact that I was living in the most
bourgeois commercial milieu imaginable--a milieu wherein every sou was
counted and grudged. Indeed, two weeks had not elapsed before I
perceived that Blanche had no real affection for me, even though she
dressed me in elegant clothes, and herself tied my tie each day. In
short, she utterly despised me. But that caused me no concern. Blase
and inert, I spent my evenings generally at the Chateau des Fleurs,
where I would get fuddled and then dance the cancan (which, in that
establishment, was a very indecent performance) with eclat. At length,
the time came when Blanche had drained my purse dry. She had conceived
an idea that, during the term of our residence together, it would be
well if I were always to walk behind her with a paper and pencil, in
order to jot down exactly what she spent, what she had saved, what she
was paying out, and what she was laying by. Well, of course I could not
fail to be aware that this would entail a battle over every ten francs;
so, although for every possible objection that I might make she had
prepared a suitable answer, she soon saw that I made no objections, and
therefore, had to start disputes herself. That is to say, she would
burst out into tirades which were met only with silence as I lolled on
a sofa and stared fixedly at the ceiling. This greatly surprised her.
At first she imagined that it was due merely to the fact that I was a
fool, "un utchitel"; wherefore she would break off her harangue in the
belief that, being too stupid to understand, I was a hopeless case.
Then she would leave the room, but return ten minutes later to resume
the contest. This continued throughout her squandering of my money--a
squandering altogether out of proportion to our means. An example is
the way in which she changed her first pair of horses for a pair which
cost sixteen thousand francs.

"Bibi," she said on the latter occasion as she approached me, "surely
you are not angry?"

"No-o-o: I am merely tired," was my reply as I pushed her from me. This
seemed to her so curious that straightway she seated herself by my side.

"You see," she went on, "I decided to spend so much upon these horses
only because I can easily sell them again. They would go at any time
for TWENTY thousand francs."

"Yes, yes. They are splendid horses, and you have got a splendid
turn-out. I am quite content. Let me hear no more of the matter."

"Then you are not angry?"

"No. Why should I be? You are wise to provide yourself with what you
need, for it will all come in handy in the future. Yes, I quite see the
necessity of your establishing yourself on a good basis, for without it
you will never earn your million. My hundred thousand francs I look
upon merely as a beginning--as a mere drop in the bucket."

Blanche, who had by no means expected such declarations from me, but,
rather, an uproar and protests, was rather taken aback.

"Well, well, what a man you are!" she exclaimed. "Mais tu as l'esprit
pour comprendre. Sais-tu, mon garcon, although you are a tutor, you
ought to have been born a prince. Are you not sorry that your money
should be going so quickly?"

"No. The quicker it goes the better."

"Mais--sais-tu-mais dis donc, are you really rich? Mais sais-tu, you
have too much contempt for money. Qu'est-ce que tu feras apres, dis
donc?"

"Apres I shall go to Homburg, and win another hundred thousand francs."

"Oui, oui, c'est ca, c'est magnifique! Ah, I know you will win them,
and bring them to me when you have done so. Dis donc--you will end by
making me love you. Since you are what you are, I mean to love you all
the time, and never to be unfaithful to you. You see, I have not loved
you before parce que je croyais que tu n'es qu'un utchitel (quelque
chose comme un lacquais, n'est-ce pas?) Yet all the time I have been
true to you, parce que je suis bonne fille."

"You lie!" I interrupted. "Did I not see you, the other day, with
Albert--with that black-jowled officer?"

"Oh, oh! Mais tu es--"

"Yes, you are lying right enough. But what makes you suppose that I
should be angry? Rubbish! Il faut que jeunesse se passe. Even if that
officer were here now, I should refrain from putting him out of the
room if I thought you really cared for him. Only, mind you, do not give
him any of my money. You hear?"

"You say, do you, that you would not be angry? Mais tu es un vrai
philosophe, sais-tu? Oui, un vrai philosophe! Eh bien, je t'aimerai, je
t'aimerai. Tu verras-tu seras content."

True enough, from that time onward she seemed to attach herself only to
me, and in this manner we spent our last ten days together. The
promised "etoiles" I did not see, but in other respects she, to a
certain extent, kept her word. Moreover, she introduced me to Hortense,
who was a remarkable woman in her way, and known among us as Therese
Philosophe.

But I need not enlarge further, for to do so would require a story to
itself, and entail a colouring which I am loth to impart to the present
narrative. The point is that with all my faculties I desired the
episode to come to an end as speedily as possible. Unfortunately, our
hundred thousand francs lasted us, as I have said, for very nearly a
month--which greatly surprised me. At all events, Blanche bought
herself articles to the tune of eighty thousand francs, and the rest
sufficed just to meet our expenses of living. Towards the close of the
affair, Blanche grew almost frank with me (at least, she scarcely lied
to me at all)--declaring, amongst other things, that none of the debts
which she had been obliged to incur were going to fall upon my head. "I
have purposely refrained from making you responsible for my bills or
borrowings," she said, "for the reason that I am sorry for you. Any
other woman in my place would have done so, and have let you go to
prison. See, then, how much I love you, and how good-hearted I am!
Think, too, what this accursed marriage with the General is going to
cost me!"

True enough, the marriage took place. It did so at the close of our
month together, and I am bound to suppose that it was upon the ceremony
that the last remnants of my money were spent. With it the
episode--that is to say, my sojourn with the Frenchwoman--came to an
end, and I formally retired from the scene.

It happened thus: A week after we had taken up our abode in Paris there
arrived thither the General. He came straight to see us, and
thenceforward lived with us practically as our guest, though he had a
flat of his own as well. Blanche met him with merry badinage and
laughter, and even threw her arms around him. In fact, she managed it
so that he had to follow everywhere in her train--whether when
promenading on the Boulevards, or when driving, or when going to the
theatre, or when paying calls; and this use which she made of him quite
satisfied the General. Still of imposing appearance and presence, as
well as of fair height, he had a dyed moustache and whiskers (he had
formerly been in the cuirassiers), and a handsome, though a somewhat
wrinkled, face. Also, his manners were excellent, and he could carry a
frockcoat well--the more so since, in Paris, he took to wearing his
orders. To promenade the Boulevards with such a man was not only a
thing possible, but also, so to speak, a thing advisable, and with this
programme the good but foolish General had not a fault to find. The
truth is that he had never counted upon this programme when he came to
Paris to seek us out. On that occasion he had made his appearance
nearly shaking with terror, for he had supposed that Blanche would at
once raise an outcry, and have him put from the door; wherefore, he was
the more enraptured at the turn that things had taken, and spent the
month in a state of senseless ecstasy. Already I had learnt that, after
our unexpected departure from Roulettenberg, he had had a sort of a
fit--that he had fallen into a swoon, and spent a week in a species of
garrulous delirium. Doctors had been summoned to him, but he had broken
away from them, and suddenly taken a train to Paris. Of course
Blanche's reception of him had acted as the best of all possible cures,
but for long enough he carried the marks of his affliction, despite his
present condition of rapture and delight. To think clearly, or even to
engage in any serious conversation, had now become impossible for him;
he could only ejaculate after each word "Hm!" and then nod his head in
confirmation. Sometimes, also, he would laugh, but only in a nervous,
hysterical sort of a fashion; while at other times he would sit for
hours looking as black as night, with his heavy eyebrows knitted. Of
much that went on he remained wholly oblivious, for he grew extremely
absent-minded, and took to talking to himself. Only Blanche could awake
him to any semblance of life. His fits of depression and moodiness in
corners always meant either that he had not seen her for some while, or
that she had gone out without taking him with her, or that she had
omitted to caress him before departing. When in this condition, he
would refuse to say what he wanted--nor had he the least idea that he
was thus sulking and moping. Next, after remaining in this condition
for an hour or two (this I remarked on two occasions when Blanche had
gone out for the day--probably to see Albert), he would begin to look
about him, and to grow uneasy, and to hurry about with an air as though
he had suddenly remembered something, and must try and find it; after
which, not perceiving the object of his search, nor succeeding in
recalling what that object had been, he would as suddenly relapse into
oblivion, and continue so until the reappearance of Blanche--merry,
wanton, half-dressed, and laughing her strident laugh as she approached
to pet him, and even to kiss him (though the latter reward he seldom
received). Once, he was so overjoyed at her doing so that he burst into
tears. Even I myself was surprised.

From the first moment of his arrival in Paris, Blanche set herself to
plead with me on his behalf; and at such times she even rose to heights
of eloquence--saying that it was for ME she had abandoned him, though
she had almost become his betrothed and promised to become so; that it
was for HER sake he had deserted his family; that, having been in his
service, I ought to remember the fact, and to feel ashamed. To all this
I would say nothing, however much she chattered on; until at length I
would burst out laughing, and the incident would come to an end (at
first, as I have said, she had thought me a fool, but since she had
come to deem me a man of sense and sensibility). In short, I had the
happiness of calling her better nature into play; for though, at first,
I had not deemed her so, she was, in reality, a kind-hearted woman
after her own fashion. "You are good and clever," she said to me
towards the finish, "and my one regret is that you are also so
wrong-headed. You will NEVER be a rich man!"

"Un vrai Russe--un Kalmuk" she usually called me.

Several times she sent me to give the General an airing in the streets,
even as she might have done with a lacquey and her spaniel; but, I
preferred to take him to the theatre, to the Bal Mabille, and to
restaurants. For this purpose she usually allowed me some money, though
the General had a little of his own, and enjoyed taking out his purse
before strangers. Once I had to use actual force to prevent him from
buying a phaeton at a price of seven hundred francs, after a vehicle
had caught his fancy in the Palais Royal as seeming to be a desirable
present for Blanche. What could SHE have done with a
seven-hundred-franc phaeton?--and the General possessed in the world
but a thousand francs! The origin even of those francs I could never
determine, but imagined them to have emanated from Mr. Astley--the more
so since the latter had paid the family's hotel bill. As for what view
the General took of myself, I think that he never divined the footing
on which I stood with Blanche. True, he had heard, in a dim sort of
way, that I had won a good deal of money; but more probably he supposed
me to be acting as secretary--or even as a kind of servant--to his
inamorata. At all events, he continued to address me, in his old
haughty style, as my superior. At times he even took it upon himself to
scold me. One morning in particular, he started to sneer at me over our
matutinal coffee. Though not a man prone to take offence, he suddenly,
and for some reason of which to this day I am ignorant, fell out with
me. Of course even he himself did not know the reason. To put things
shortly, he began a speech which had neither beginning nor ending, and
cried out, a batons rompus, that I was a boy whom he would soon put to
rights--and so forth, and so forth. Yet no one could understand what he
was saying, and at length Blanche exploded in a burst of laughter.
Finally something appeased him, and he was taken out for his walk. More
than once, however, I noticed that his depression was growing upon him;
that he seemed to be feeling the want of somebody or something; that,
despite Blanche's presence, he was missing some person in particular.
Twice, on these occasions, did he plunge into a conversation with me,
though he could not make himself intelligible, and only went on
rambling about the service, his late wife, his home, and his property.
Every now and then, also, some particular word would please him;
whereupon he would repeat it a hundred times in the day--even though
the word happened to express neither his thoughts nor his feelings.
Again, I would try to get him to talk about his children, but always he
cut me short in his old snappish way, and passed to another subject.
"Yes, yes--my children," was all that I could extract from him. "Yes,
you are right in what you have said about them." Only once did he
disclose his real feelings. That was when we were taking him to the
theatre, and suddenly he exclaimed: "My unfortunate children! Yes, sir,
they are unfortunate children." Once, too, when I chanced to mention
Polina, he grew quite bitter against her. "She is an ungrateful woman!"
he exclaimed. "She is a bad and ungrateful woman! She has broken up a
family. If there were laws here, I would have her impaled. Yes, I
would." As for De Griers, the General would not have his name
mentioned. "He has ruined me," he would say. "He has robbed me, and cut
my throat. For two years he was a perfect nightmare to me. For months
at a time he never left me in my dreams. Do not speak of him again."

It was now clear to me that Blanche and he were on the point of coming
to terms; yet, true to my usual custom, I said nothing. At length,
Blanche took the initiative in explaining matters. She did so a week
before we parted.

"Il a du chance," she prattled, "for the Grandmother is now REALLY ill,
and therefore, bound to die. Mr. Astley has just sent a telegram to say
so, and you will agree with me that the General is likely to be her
heir. Even if he should not be so, he will not come amiss, since, in
the first place, he has his pension, and, in the second place, he will
be content to live in a back room; whereas I shall be Madame General,
and get into a good circle of society" (she was always thinking of
this) "and become a Russian chatelaine. Yes, I shall have a mansion of
my own, and peasants, and a million of money at my back."

"But, suppose he should prove jealous? He might demand all sorts of
things, you know. Do you follow me?"

"Oh, dear no! How ridiculous that would be of him! Besides, I have
taken measures to prevent it. You need not be alarmed. That is to say,
I have induced him to sign notes of hand in Albert's name.
Consequently, at any time I could get him punished. Isn't he
ridiculous?"

"Very well, then. Marry him."

And, in truth, she did so--though the marriage was a family one only,
and involved no pomp or ceremony. In fact, she invited to the nuptials
none but Albert and a few other friends. Hortense, Cleopatre, and the
rest she kept firmly at a distance. As for the bridegroom, he took a
great interest in his new position. Blanche herself tied his tie, and
Blanche herself pomaded him--with the result that, in his frockcoat and
white waistcoat, he looked quite comme il faut.

"Il est, pourtant, TRES comme il faut," Blanche remarked when she
issued from his room, as though the idea that he was "TRES comme il
faut" had impressed even her. For myself, I had so little knowledge of
the minor details of the affair, and took part in it so much as a
supine spectator, that I have forgotten most of what passed on this
occasion. I only remember that Blanche and the Widow figured at it, not
as "de Cominges," but as "du Placet." Why they had hitherto been "de
Cominges" I do not know--I only know that this entirely satisfied the
General, that he liked the name "du Placet" even better than he had
liked the name "de Cominges." On the morning of the wedding, he paced
the salon in his gala attire and kept repeating to himself with an air
of great gravity and importance: "Mlle. Blanche du Placet! Mlle.
Blanche du Placet, du Placet!" He beamed with satisfaction as he did
so. Both in the church and at the wedding breakfast he remained not
only pleased and contented, but even proud. She too underwent a change,
for now she assumed an air of added dignity.

"I must behave altogether differently," she confided to me with a
serious air. "Yet, mark you, there is a tiresome circumstance of which
I had never before thought--which is, how best to pronounce my new
family name. Zagorianski, Zagozianski, Madame la Generale de Sago,
Madame la Generale de Fourteen Consonants--oh these infernal Russian
names! The LAST of them would be the best to use, don't you think?"

At length the time had come for us to part, and Blanche, the egregious
Blanche, shed real tears as she took her leave of me. "Tu etais bon
enfant" she said with a sob. "Je te croyais bete et tu en avais l'air,
but it suited you." Then, having given me a final handshake, she
exclaimed, "Attends!"; whereafter, running into her boudoir, she
brought me thence two thousand-franc notes. I could scarcely believe my
eyes! "They may come in handy for you," she explained, "for, though you
are a very learned tutor, you are a very stupid man. More than two
thousand francs, however, I am not going to give you, for the reason
that, if I did so, you would gamble them all away. Now good-bye. Nous
serons toujours bons amis, and if you win again, do not fail to come to
me, et tu seras heureux."

I myself had still five hundred francs left, as well as a watch worth a
thousand francs, a few diamond studs, and so on. Consequently, I could
subsist for quite a length of time without particularly bestirring
myself. Purposely I have taken up my abode where I am now partly to
pull myself together, and partly to wait for Mr. Astley, who, I have
learnt, will soon be here for a day or so on business. Yes, I know
that, and then--and then I shall go to Homburg. But to Roulettenberg I
shall not go until next year, for they say it is bad to try one's luck
twice in succession at a table. Moreover, Homburg is where the best
play is carried on.



XVII

It is a year and eight months since I last looked at these notes of
mine. I do so now only because, being overwhelmed with depression, I
wish to distract my mind by reading them through at random. I left them
off at the point where I was just going to Homburg. My God, with what a
light heart (comparatively speaking) did I write the concluding
lines!--though it may be not so much with a light heart, as with a
measure of self-confidence and unquenchable hope. At that time had I
any doubts of myself? Yet behold me now. Scarcely a year and a half
have passed, yet I am in a worse position than the meanest beggar. But
what is a beggar? A fig for beggary! I have ruined myself--that is all.
Nor is there anything with which I can compare myself; there is no
moral which it would be of any use for you to read to me. At the
present moment nothing could well be more incongruous than a moral. Oh,
you self-satisfied persons who, in your unctuous pride, are forever
ready to mouth your maxims--if only you knew how fully I myself
comprehend the sordidness of my present state, you would not trouble to
wag your tongues at me! What could you say to me that I do not already
know? Well, wherein lies my difficulty? It lies in the fact that by a
single turn of a roulette wheel everything for me, has become changed.
Yet, had things befallen otherwise, these moralists would have been
among the first (yes, I feel persuaded of it) to approach me with
friendly jests and congratulations. Yes, they would never have turned
from me as they are doing now! A fig for all of them! What am I? I am
zero--nothing. What shall I be tomorrow? I may be risen from the dead,
and have begun life anew. For still, I may discover the man in myself,
if only my manhood has not become utterly shattered.

I went, I say, to Homburg, but afterwards went also to Roulettenberg,
as well as to Spa and Baden; in which latter place, for a time, I acted
as valet to a certain rascal of a Privy Councillor, by name Heintze,
who until lately was also my master here. Yes, for five months I lived
my life with lacqueys! That was just after I had come out of
Roulettenberg prison, where I had lain for a small debt which I owed.
Out of that prison I was bailed by--by whom? By Mr. Astley? By Polina?
I do not know. At all events, the debt was paid to the tune of two
hundred thalers, and I sallied forth a free man. But what was I to do
with myself? In my dilemma I had recourse to this Heintze, who was a
young scapegrace, and the sort of man who could speak and write three
languages. At first I acted as his secretary, at a salary of thirty
gulden a month, but afterwards I became his lacquey, for the reason
that he could not afford to keep a secretary--only an unpaid servant. I
had nothing else to turn to, so I remained with him, and allowed myself
to become his flunkey. But by stinting myself in meat and drink I
saved, during my five months of service, some seventy gulden; and one
evening, when we were at Baden, I told him that I wished to resign my
post, and then hastened to betake myself to roulette.

Oh, how my heart beat as I did so! No, it was not the money that I
valued--what I wanted was to make all this mob of Heintzes, hotel
proprietors, and fine ladies of Baden talk about me, recount my story,
wonder at me, extol my doings, and worship my winnings. True, these
were childish fancies and aspirations, but who knows but that I might
meet Polina, and be able to tell her everything, and see her look of
surprise at the fact that I had overcome so many adverse strokes of
fortune. No, I had no desire for money for its own sake, for I was
perfectly well aware that I should only squander it upon some new
Blanche, and spend another three weeks in Paris after buying a pair of
horses which had cost sixteen thousand francs. No, I never believed
myself to be a hoarder; in fact, I knew only too well that I was a
spendthrift. And already, with a sort of fear, a sort of sinking in my
heart, I could hear the cries of the croupiers--"Trente et un, rouge,
impair et passe," "Quarte, noir, pair et manque."  How greedily I gazed
upon the gaming-table, with its scattered louis d'or, ten-gulden
pieces, and thalers; upon the streams of gold as they issued from the
croupier's hands, and piled themselves up into heaps of gold
scintillating as fire; upon the ell--long rolls of silver lying around
the croupier. Even at a distance of two rooms I could hear the chink of
that money--so much so that I nearly fell into convulsions.

Ah, the evening when I took those seventy gulden to the gaming table
was a memorable one for me. I began by staking ten gulden upon passe.
For passe I had always had a sort of predilection, yet I lost my stake
upon it. This left me with sixty gulden in silver. After a moment's
thought I selected zero--beginning by staking five gulden at a time.
Twice I lost, but the third round suddenly brought up the desired coup.
I could almost have died with joy as I received my one hundred and
seventy-five gulden. Indeed, I have been less pleased when, in former
times, I have won a hundred thousand gulden. Losing no time, I staked
another hundred gulden upon the red, and won; two hundred upon the red,
and won; four hundred upon the black, and won; eight hundred upon
manque, and won. Thus, with the addition of the remainder of my
original capital, I found myself possessed, within five minutes, of
seventeen hundred gulden.  Ah, at such moments one forgets both oneself
and one's former failures! This I had gained by risking my very life. I
had dared so to risk, and behold, again I was a member of mankind!

I went and hired a room, I shut myself up in it, and sat counting my
money until three o'clock in the morning. To think that when I awoke on
the morrow, I was no lacquey! I decided to leave at once for Homburg.
There I should neither have to serve as a footman nor to lie in prison.
Half an hour before starting, I went and ventured a couple of
stakes--no more; with the result that, in all, I lost fifteen hundred
florins. Nevertheless, I proceeded to Homburg, and have now been there
for a month.

Of course, I am living in constant trepidation, playing for the
smallest of stakes, and always looking out for something--calculating,
standing whole days by the gaming-tables to watch the play--even seeing
that play in my dreams--yet seeming, the while, to be in some way
stiffening, to be growing caked, as it were, in mire. But I must
conclude my notes, which I finish under the impression of a recent
encounter with Mr. Astley. I had not seen him since we parted at
Roulettenberg, and now we met quite by accident. At the time I was
walking in the public gardens, and meditating upon the fact that not
only had I still some fifty gulden in my possession, but also I had
fully paid up my hotel bill three days ago. Consequently, I was in a
position to try my luck again at roulette; and if I won anything I
should be able to continue my play, whereas, if I lost what I now
possessed, I should once more have to accept a lacquey's place,
provided that, in the alternative, I failed to discover a Russian
family which stood in need of a tutor. Plunged in these reflections, I
started on my daily walk through the Park and forest towards a
neighbouring principality. Sometimes, on such occasions, I spent four
hours on the way, and would return to Homburg tired and hungry; but, on
this particular occasion, I had scarcely left the gardens for the Park
when I caught sight of Astley seated on a bench. As soon as he
perceived me, he called me by name, and I went and sat down beside him;
but, on noticing that he seemed a little stiff in his manner, I
hastened to moderate the expression of joy which the sight of him had
called forth.

"YOU here?" he said. "Well, I had an idea that I should meet you. Do
not trouble to tell me anything, for I know all--yes, all. In fact,
your whole life during the past twenty months lies within my knowledge."

"How closely you watch the doings of your old friends!" I replied.
"That does you infinite credit. But stop a moment. You have reminded me
of something. Was it you who bailed me out of Roulettenberg prison when
I was lying there for a debt of two hundred gulden? SOMEONE did so."

"Oh dear no!--though I knew all the time that you were lying there."

"Perhaps you could tell me who DID bail me out?"

"No; I am afraid I could not."

"What a strange thing! For I know no Russians at all here, so it cannot
have been a Russian who befriended me. In Russia we Orthodox folk DO go
bail for one another, but in this case I thought it must have been done
by some English stranger who was not conversant with the ways of the
country."

Mr. Astley seemed to listen to me with a sort of surprise. Evidently he
had expected to see me looking more crushed and broken than I was.

"Well," he said--not very pleasantly, "I am none the less glad to find
that you retain your old independence of spirit, as well as your
buoyancy."

"Which means that you are vexed at not having found me more abased and
humiliated than I am?" I retorted with a smile.

Astley was not quick to understand this, but presently did so and
laughed.

"Your remarks please me as they always did," he continued. "In those
words I see the clever, triumphant, and, above all things, cynical
friend of former days. Only Russians have the faculty of combining
within themselves so many opposite qualities. Yes, most men love to see
their best friend in abasement; for generally it is on such abasement
that friendship is founded. All thinking persons know that ancient
truth. Yet, on the present occasion, I assure you, I am sincerely glad
to see that you are NOT cast down. Tell me, are you never going to give
up gambling?"

"Damn the gambling! Yes, I should certainly have given it up, were it
not that--"

"That you are losing? I thought so. You need not tell me any more. I
know how things stand, for you have said that last in despair, and
therefore, truthfully. Have you no other employment than gambling?"

"No; none whatever."

Astley gave me a searching glance. At that time it was ages since I had
last looked at a paper or turned the pages of a book.

"You are growing blase," he said. "You have not only renounced life,
with its interests and social ties, but the duties of a citizen and a
man; you have not only renounced the friends whom I know you to have
had, and every aim in life but that of winning money; but you have also
renounced your memory. Though I can remember you in the strong, ardent
period of your life, I feel persuaded that you have now forgotten every
better feeling of that period--that your present dreams and aspirations
of subsistence do not rise above pair, impair rouge, noir, the twelve
middle numbers, and so forth."

"Enough, Mr. Astley!" I cried with some irritation--almost in anger.
"Kindly do not recall to me any more recollections, for I can remember
things for myself. Only for a time have I put them out of my head. Only
until I shall have rehabilitated myself, am I keeping my memory dulled.
When that hour shall come, you will see me arise from the dead."

"Then you will have to be here another ten years," he replied. "Should
I then be alive, I will remind you--here, on this very bench--of what I
have just said. In fact, I will bet you a wager that I shall do so."

"Say no more," I interrupted impatiently. "And to show you that I have
not wholly forgotten the past, may I enquire where Mlle. Polina is? If
it was not you who bailed me out of prison, it must have been she. Yet
never have I heard a word concerning her."

"No, I do not think it was she. At the present moment she is in
Switzerland, and you will do me a favour by ceasing to ask me these
questions about her." Astley said this with a firm, and even an angry,
air.

"Which means that she has dealt you a serious wound?" I burst out with
an involuntary sneer.

"Mlle. Polina," he continued, "Is the best of all possible living
beings; but, I repeat, that I shall thank you to cease questioning me
about her. You never really knew her, and her name on your lips is an
offence to my moral feeling."

"Indeed? On what subject, then, have I a better right to speak to you
than on this? With it are bound up all your recollections and mine.
However, do not be alarmed: I have no wish to probe too far into your
private, your secret affairs. My interest in Mlle. Polina does not
extend beyond her outward circumstances and surroundings. About them
you could tell me in two words."

"Well, on condition that the matter shall end there, I will tell you
that for a long time Mlle. Polina was ill, and still is so. My mother
and sister entertained her for a while at their home in the north of
England, and thereafter Mlle. Polina's grandmother (you remember the
mad old woman?) died, and left Mlle. Polina a personal legacy of seven
thousand pounds sterling. That was about six months ago, and now Mlle.
is travelling with my sister's family--my sister having since married.
Mlle.'s little brother and sister also benefited by the Grandmother's
will, and are now being educated in London. As for the General, he died
in Paris last month, of a stroke. Mlle. Blanche did well by him, for
she succeeded in having transferred to herself all that he received
from the Grandmother. That, I think, concludes all that I have to tell."

"And De Griers? Is he too travelling in Switzerland?"

"No; nor do I know where he is. Also I warn you once more that you had
better avoid such hints and ignoble suppositions; otherwise you will
assuredly have to reckon with me."

"What? In spite of our old friendship?"

"Yes, in spite of our old friendship."

"Then I beg your pardon a thousand times, Mr. Astley. I meant nothing
