notice things with surprise. You know, two months ago, that modest,
charming, excellent young man, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, who’s in the
service here, began to be a regular visitor at the house. You met him here
ever so many times yourself. And he is an excellent, earnest young man,
isn’t he? He comes once every three days, not every day (though I should
be glad to see him every day), and always so well dressed. Altogether, I
love young people, Alyosha, talented, modest, like you, and he has almost
the mind of a statesman, he talks so charmingly, and I shall certainly,
certainly try and get promotion for him. He is a future diplomat. On that
awful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night. And your
friend Rakitin comes in such boots, and always stretches them out on the
carpet.... He began hinting at his feelings, in fact, and one day, as he
was going, he squeezed my hand terribly hard. My foot began to swell
directly after he pressed my hand like that. He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here
before, and would you believe it, he is always gibing at him, growling at
him, for some reason. I simply looked at the way they went on together and
laughed inwardly. So I was sitting here alone—no, I was laid up then.
Well, I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in, and only
fancy! brought me some verses of his own composition—a short poem, on my
bad foot: that is, he described my foot in a poem. Wait a minute—how did
it go?


    A captivating little foot.


It began somehow like that. I can never remember poetry. I’ve got it here.
I’ll show it to you later. But it’s a charming thing—charming; and, you
know, it’s not only about the foot, it had a good moral, too, a charming
idea, only I’ve forgotten it; in fact, it was just the thing for an album.
So, of course, I thanked him, and he was evidently flattered. I’d hardly
had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch, and Rakitin suddenly
looked as black as night. I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way,
for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses.
I had a presentiment of it; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in. I showed Pyotr
Ilyitch the verses and didn’t say who was the author. But I am convinced
that he guessed, though he won’t own it to this day, and declares he had
no idea. But he says that on purpose. Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at
once, and fell to criticizing it. ‘Wretched doggerel,’ he said they were,
‘some divinity student must have written them,’ and with such vehemence,
such vehemence! Then, instead of laughing, your friend flew into a rage.
‘Good gracious!’ I thought, ‘they’ll fly at each other.’ ‘It was I who
wrote them,’ said he. ‘I wrote them as a joke,’ he said, ‘for I think it
degrading to write verses.... But they are good poetry. They want to put a
monument to your Pushkin for writing about women’s feet, while I wrote
with a moral purpose, and you,’ said he, ‘are an advocate of serfdom.
You’ve no humane ideas,’ said he. ‘You have no modern enlightened
feelings, you are uninfluenced by progress, you are a mere official,’ he
said, ‘and you take bribes.’ Then I began screaming and imploring them.
And, you know, Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward. He at once took up
the most gentlemanly tone, looked at him sarcastically, listened, and
apologized. ‘I’d no idea,’ said he. ‘I shouldn’t have said it, if I had
known. I should have praised it. Poets are all so irritable,’ he said. In
short, he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone. He
explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic. I thought he was in
earnest. Only as I lay there, just as before you now, I thought, ‘Would
it, or would it not, be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for
shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house?’ And, would you believe it, I
lay here, shut my eyes, and wondered, would it be the proper thing or not.
I kept worrying and worrying, and my heart began to beat, and I couldn’t
make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not. One voice seemed to be
telling me, ‘Speak,’ and the other ‘No, don’t speak.’ And no sooner had
the second voice said that than I cried out, and fainted. Of course, there
was a fuss. I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin, ‘It’s painful for me to
say it, but I don’t wish to see you in my house again.’ So I turned him
out. Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, I know myself I did wrong. I was putting it
on. I wasn’t angry with him at all, really; but I suddenly fancied—that
was what did it—that it would be such a fine scene.... And yet, believe
me, it was quite natural, for I really shed tears and cried for several
days afterwards, and then suddenly, one afternoon, I forgot all about it.
So it’s a fortnight since he’s been here, and I kept wondering whether he
would come again. I wondered even yesterday, then suddenly last night came
this _Gossip_. I read it and gasped. Who could have written it? He must
have written it. He went home, sat down, wrote it on the spot, sent it,
and they put it in. It was a fortnight ago, you see. But, Alyosha, it’s
awful how I keep talking and don’t say what I want to say. Ah! the words
come of themselves!”

“It’s very important for me to be in time to see my brother to‐day,”
Alyosha faltered.

“To be sure, to be sure! You bring it all back to me. Listen, what is an
aberration?”

“What aberration?” asked Alyosha, wondering.

“In the legal sense. An aberration in which everything is pardonable.
Whatever you do, you will be acquitted at once.”

“What do you mean?”

“I’ll tell you. This Katya ... Ah! she is a charming, charming creature,
only I never can make out who it is she is in love with. She was with me
some time ago and I couldn’t get anything out of her. Especially as she
won’t talk to me except on the surface now. She is always talking about my
health and nothing else, and she takes up such a tone with me, too. I
simply said to myself, ‘Well, so be it. I don’t care’... Oh, yes. I was
talking of aberration. This doctor has come. You know a doctor has come?
Of course, you know it—the one who discovers madmen. You wrote for him.
No, it wasn’t you, but Katya. It’s all Katya’s doing. Well, you see, a man
may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration. He may be
conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration.
And there’s no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from
aberration. They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were
reformed. It’s all the good effect of the reformed law courts. The doctor
has been here and questioned me about that evening, about the gold mines.
‘How did he seem then?’ he asked me. He must have been in a state of
aberration. He came in shouting, ‘Money, money, three thousand! Give me
three thousand!’ and then went away and immediately did the murder. ‘I
don’t want to murder him,’ he said, and he suddenly went and murdered him.
That’s why they’ll acquit him, because he struggled against it and yet he
murdered him.”

“But he didn’t murder him,” Alyosha interrupted rather sharply. He felt
more and more sick with anxiety and impatience.

“Yes, I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him.”

“Grigory?” cried Alyosha.

“Yes, yes; it was Grigory. He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down,
and then got up, saw the door open, went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch.”

“But why, why?”

“Suffering from aberration. When he recovered from the blow Dmitri
Fyodorovitch gave him on the head, he was suffering from aberration; he
went and committed the murder. As for his saying he didn’t, he very likely
doesn’t remember. Only, you know, it’ll be better, ever so much better, if
Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him. And that’s how it must have been, though
I say it was Grigory. It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that’s
better, ever so much better! Oh! not better that a son should have killed
his father, I don’t defend that. Children ought to honor their parents,
and yet it would be better if it were he, as you’d have nothing to cry
over then, for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was
conscious, but did not know what he was doing. Let them acquit him—that’s
so humane, and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are. I knew
nothing about it, but they say they have been so a long time. And when I
heard it yesterday, I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at
once. And if he is acquitted, make him come straight from the law courts
to dinner with me, and I’ll have a party of friends, and we’ll drink to
the reformed law courts. I don’t believe he’d be dangerous; besides, I’ll
invite a great many friends, so that he could always be led out if he did
anything. And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in
another town, for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best
judges. And, besides, who isn’t suffering from aberration nowadays?—you,
I, all of us are in a state of aberration, and there are ever so many
examples of it: a man sits singing a song, suddenly something annoys him,
he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across, and no one
blames him for it. I read that lately, and all the doctors confirm it. The
doctors are always confirming; they confirm anything. Why, my Lise is in a
state of aberration. She made me cry again yesterday, and the day before,
too, and to‐day I suddenly realized that it’s all due to aberration. Oh,
Lise grieves me so! I believe she’s quite mad. Why did she send for you?
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself?”

“Yes, she sent for me, and I am just going to her.” Alyosha got up
resolutely.

“Oh, my dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, perhaps that’s what’s most
important,” Madame Hohlakov cried, suddenly bursting into tears. “God
knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart, and it’s no matter her
sending for you on the sly, without telling her mother. But forgive me, I
can’t trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch,
though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man. But only fancy,
he’s been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it!”

“How? What? When?” Alyosha was exceedingly surprised. He had not sat down
again and listened standing.

“I will tell you; that’s perhaps why I asked you to come, for I don’t know
now why I did ask you to come. Well, Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me
twice, since he came back from Moscow. First time he came as a friend to
call on me, and the second time Katya was here and he came because he
heard she was here. I didn’t, of course, expect him to come often, knowing
what a lot he has to do as it is, _vous comprenez, cette affaire et la
mort terrible de votre papa_. But I suddenly heard he’d been here again,
not to see me but to see Lise. That’s six days ago now. He came, stayed
five minutes, and went away. And I didn’t hear of it till three days
afterwards, from Glafira, so it was a great shock to me. I sent for Lise
directly. She laughed. ‘He thought you were asleep,’ she said, ‘and came
in to me to ask after your health.’ Of course, that’s how it happened. But
Lise, Lise, mercy on us, how she distresses me! Would you believe it, one
night, four days ago, just after you saw her last time, and had gone away,
she suddenly had a fit, screaming, shrieking, hysterics! Why is it I never
have hysterics? Then, next day another fit, and the same thing on the
third, and yesterday too, and then yesterday that aberration. She suddenly
screamed out, ‘I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch. I insist on your never letting
him come to the house again.’ I was struck dumb at these amazing words,
and answered, ‘On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent
young man, a young man of such learning too, and so unfortunate?’—for all
this business is a misfortune, isn’t it? She suddenly burst out laughing
at my words, and so rudely, you know. Well, I was pleased; I thought I had
amused her and the fits would pass off, especially as I wanted to refuse
to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without
my knowledge, and meant to ask him for an explanation. But early this
morning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and, would you
believe it, slapped her in the face. That’s monstrous; I am always polite
to my servants. And an hour later she was hugging Yulia’s feet and kissing
them. She sent a message to me that she wasn’t coming to me at all, and
would never come and see me again, and when I dragged myself down to her,
she rushed to kiss me, crying, and as she kissed me, she pushed me out of
the room without saying a word, so I couldn’t find out what was the
matter. Now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I rest all my hopes on you, and, of
course, my whole life is in your hands. I simply beg you to go to Lise and
find out everything from her, as you alone can, and come back and tell
me—me, her mother, for you understand it will be the death of me, simply
the death of me, if this goes on, or else I shall run away. I can stand no
more. I have patience; but I may lose patience, and then ... then
something awful will happen. Ah, dear me! At last, Pyotr Ilyitch!” cried
Madame Hohlakov, beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room. “You
are late, you are late! Well, sit down, speak, put us out of suspense.
What does the counsel say. Where are you off to, Alexey Fyodorovitch?”

“To Lise.”

“Oh, yes. You won’t forget, you won’t forget what I asked you? It’s a
question of life and death!”

“Of course, I won’t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,” muttered
Alyosha, beating a hasty retreat.

“No, be sure, be sure to come in; don’t say ‘If you can.’ I shall die if
you don’t,” Madame Hohlakov called after him, but Alyosha had already left
the room.



Chapter III. A Little Demon


Going in to Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid‐chair, in
which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk. She did not move
to meet him, but her sharp, keen eyes were simply riveted on his face.
There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was pale and yellow.
Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in three
days. She was positively thinner. She did not hold out her hand to him. He
touched the thin, long fingers which lay motionless on her dress, then he
sat down facing her, without a word.

“I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison,” Lise said curtly, “and
mamma’s kept you there for hours; she’s just been telling you about me and
Yulia.”

“How do you know?” asked Alyosha.

“I’ve been listening. Why do you stare at me? I want to listen and I do
listen, there’s no harm in that. I don’t apologize.”

“You are upset about something?”

“On the contrary, I am very happy. I’ve only just been reflecting for the
thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be your
wife. You are not fit to be a husband. If I were to marry you and give you
a note to take to the man I loved after you, you’d take it and be sure to
give it to him and bring an answer back, too. If you were forty, you would
still go on taking my love‐letters for me.”

She suddenly laughed.

“There is something spiteful and yet open‐hearted about you,” Alyosha
smiled to her.

“The open‐heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you.
What’s more, I don’t want to feel ashamed with you, just with you.
Alyosha, why is it I don’t respect you? I am very fond of you, but I don’t
respect you. If I respected you, I shouldn’t talk to you without shame,
should I?”

“No.”

“But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you?”

“No, I don’t believe it.”

Lise laughed nervously again; she spoke rapidly.

“I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some sweets in prison. Alyosha,
you know, you are quite pretty! I shall love you awfully for having so
quickly allowed me not to love you.”

“Why did you send for me to‐day, Lise?”

“I wanted to tell you of a longing I have. I should like some one to
torture me, marry me and then torture me, deceive me and go away. I don’t
want to be happy.”

“You are in love with disorder?”

“Yes, I want disorder. I keep wanting to set fire to the house. I keep
imagining how I’ll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly; it must
be on the sly. They’ll try to put it out, but it’ll go on burning. And I
shall know and say nothing. Ah, what silliness! And how bored I am!”

She waved her hand with a look of repulsion.

“It’s your luxurious life,” said Alyosha, softly.

“Is it better, then, to be poor?”

“Yes, it is better.”

“That’s what your monk taught you. That’s not true. Let me be rich and all
the rest poor, I’ll eat sweets and drink cream and not give any to any one
else. Ach, don’t speak, don’t say anything,” she shook her hand at him,
though Alyosha had not opened his mouth. “You’ve told me all that before,
I know it all by heart. It bores me. If I am ever poor, I shall murder
somebody, and even if I am rich, I may murder some one, perhaps—why do
nothing! But do you know, I should like to reap, cut the rye? I’ll marry
you, and you shall become a peasant, a real peasant; we’ll keep a colt,
shall we? Do you know Kalganov?”

“Yes.”

“He is always wandering about, dreaming. He says, ‘Why live in real life?
It’s better to dream. One can dream the most delightful things, but real
life is a bore.’ But he’ll be married soon for all that; he’s been making
love to me already. Can you spin tops?”

“Yes.”

“Well, he’s just like a top: he wants to be wound up and set spinning and
then to be lashed, lashed, lashed with a whip. If I marry him, I’ll keep
him spinning all his life. You are not ashamed to be with me?”

“No.”

“You are awfully cross, because I don’t talk about holy things. I don’t
want to be holy. What will they do to one in the next world for the
greatest sin? You must know all about that.”

“God will censure you.” Alyosha was watching her steadily.

“That’s just what I should like. I would go up and they would censure me,
and I would burst out laughing in their faces. I should dreadfully like to
set fire to the house, Alyosha, to our house; you still don’t believe me?”

“Why? There are children of twelve years old, who have a longing to set
fire to something and they do set things on fire, too. It’s a sort of
disease.”

“That’s not true, that’s not true; there may be children, but that’s not
what I mean.”

“You take evil for good; it’s a passing crisis, it’s the result of your
illness, perhaps.”

“You do despise me, though! It’s simply that I don’t want to do good, I
want to do evil, and it has nothing to do with illness.”

“Why do evil?”

“So that everything might be destroyed. Ah, how nice it would be if
everything were destroyed! You know, Alyosha, I sometimes think of doing a
fearful lot of harm and everything bad, and I should do it for a long
while on the sly and suddenly every one would find it out. Every one will
stand round and point their fingers at me and I would look at them all.
That would be awfully nice. Why would it be so nice, Alyosha?”

“I don’t know. It’s a craving to destroy something good or, as you say, to
set fire to something. It happens sometimes.”

“I not only say it, I shall do it.”

“I believe you.”

“Ah, how I love you for saying you believe me. And you are not lying one
little bit. But perhaps you think that I am saying all this on purpose to
annoy you?”

“No, I don’t think that ... though perhaps there is a little desire to do
that in it, too.”

“There is a little. I never can tell lies to you,” she declared, with a
strange fire in her eyes.

What struck Alyosha above everything was her earnestness. There was not a
trace of humor or jesting in her face now, though, in old days, fun and
gayety never deserted her even at her most “earnest” moments.

“There are moments when people love crime,” said Alyosha thoughtfully.

“Yes, yes! You have uttered my thought; they love crime, every one loves
crime, they love it always, not at some ‘moments.’ You know, it’s as
though people have made an agreement to lie about it and have lied about
it ever since. They all declare that they hate evil, but secretly they all
love it.”

“And are you still reading nasty books?”

“Yes, I am. Mamma reads them and hides them under her pillow and I steal
them.”

“Aren’t you ashamed to destroy yourself?”

“I want to destroy myself. There’s a boy here, who lay down between the
railway lines when the train was passing. Lucky fellow! Listen, your
brother is being tried now for murdering his father and every one loves
his having killed his father.”

“Loves his having killed his father?”

“Yes, loves it; every one loves it! Everybody says it’s so awful, but
secretly they simply love it. I for one love it.”

“There is some truth in what you say about every one,” said Alyosha
softly.

“Oh, what ideas you have!” Lise shrieked in delight. “And you a monk, too!
You wouldn’t believe how I respect you, Alyosha, for never telling lies.
Oh, I must tell you a funny dream of mine. I sometimes dream of devils.
It’s night; I am in my room with a candle and suddenly there are devils
all over the place, in all the corners, under the table, and they open the
doors; there’s a crowd of them behind the doors and they want to come and
seize me. And they are just coming, just seizing me. But I suddenly cross
myself and they all draw back, though they don’t go away altogether, they
stand at the doors and in the corners, waiting. And suddenly I have a
frightful longing to revile God aloud, and so I begin, and then they come
crowding back to me, delighted, and seize me again and I cross myself
again and they all draw back. It’s awful fun. it takes one’s breath away.”

“I’ve had the same dream, too,” said Alyosha suddenly.

“Really?” cried Lise, surprised. “I say, Alyosha, don’t laugh, that’s
awfully important. Could two different people have the same dream?”

“It seems they can.”

“Alyosha, I tell you, it’s awfully important,” Lise went on, with really
excessive amazement. “It’s not the dream that’s important, but your having
the same dream as me. You never lie to me, don’t lie now: is it true? You
are not laughing?”

“It’s true.”

Lise seemed extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she was
silent.

“Alyosha, come and see me, come and see me more often,” she said suddenly,
in a supplicating voice.

“I’ll always come to see you, all my life,” answered Alyosha firmly.

“You are the only person I can talk to, you know,” Lise began again. “I
talk to no one but myself and you. Only you in the whole world. And to you
more readily than to myself. And I am not a bit ashamed with you, not a
bit. Alyosha, why am I not ashamed with you, not a bit? Alyosha, is it
true that at Easter the Jews steal a child and kill it?”

“I don’t know.”

“There’s a book here in which I read about the trial of a Jew, who took a
child of four years old and cut off the fingers from both hands, and then
crucified him on the wall, hammered nails into him and crucified him, and
afterwards, when he was tried, he said that the child died soon, within
four hours. That was ‘soon’! He said the child moaned, kept on moaning and
he stood admiring it. That’s nice!”

“Nice?”

“Nice; I sometimes imagine that it was I who crucified him. He would hang
there moaning and I would sit opposite him eating pineapple _compote_. I
am awfully fond of pineapple _compote_. Do you like it?”

Alyosha looked at her in silence. Her pale, sallow face was suddenly
contorted, her eyes burned.

“You know, when I read about that Jew I shook with sobs all night. I kept
fancying how the little thing cried and moaned (a child of four years old
understands, you know), and all the while the thought of pineapple
_compote_ haunted me. In the morning I wrote a letter to a certain person,
begging him _particularly_ to come and see me. He came and I suddenly told
him all about the child and the pineapple _compote_. _All_ about it,
_all_, and said that it was nice. He laughed and said it really was nice.
Then he got up and went away. He was only here five minutes. Did he
despise me? Did he despise me? Tell me, tell me, Alyosha, did he despise
me or not?” She sat up on the couch, with flashing eyes.

“Tell me,” Alyosha asked anxiously, “did you send for that person?”

“Yes, I did.”

“Did you send him a letter?”

“Yes.”

“Simply to ask about that, about that child?”

“No, not about that at all. But when he came, I asked him about that at
once. He answered, laughed, got up and went away.”

“That person behaved honorably,” Alyosha murmured.

“And did he despise me? Did he laugh at me?”

“No, for perhaps he believes in the pineapple _compote_ himself. He is
very ill now, too, Lise.”

“Yes, he does believe in it,” said Lise, with flashing eyes.

“He doesn’t despise any one,” Alyosha went on. “Only he does not believe
any one. If he doesn’t believe in people, of course, he does despise
them.”

“Then he despises me, me?”

“You, too.”

“Good,” Lise seemed to grind her teeth. “When he went out laughing, I felt
that it was nice to be despised. The child with fingers cut off is nice,
and to be despised is nice....”

And she laughed in Alyosha’s face, a feverish malicious laugh.

“Do you know, Alyosha, do you know, I should like—Alyosha, save me!” She
suddenly jumped from the couch, rushed to him and seized him with both
hands. “Save me!” she almost groaned. “Is there any one in the world I
could tell what I’ve told you? I’ve told you the truth, the truth. I shall
kill myself, because I loathe everything! I don’t want to live, because I
loathe everything! I loathe everything, everything. Alyosha, why don’t you
love me in the least?” she finished in a frenzy.

“But I do love you!” answered Alyosha warmly.

“And will you weep over me, will you?”

“Yes.”

“Not because I won’t be your wife, but simply weep for me?”

“Yes.”

“Thank you! It’s only your tears I want. Every one else may punish me and
trample me under foot, every one, every one, not excepting _any one_. For
I don’t love any one. Do you hear, not any one! On the contrary, I hate
him! Go, Alyosha; it’s time you went to your brother”; she tore herself
away from him suddenly.

“How can I leave you like this?” said Alyosha, almost in alarm.

“Go to your brother, the prison will be shut; go, here’s your hat. Give my
love to Mitya, go, go!”

And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door. He looked at her
with pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his right
hand, a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed. He glanced at it and
instantly read the address, “To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.” He looked
quickly at Lise. Her face had become almost menacing.

“Give it to him, you must give it to him!” she ordered him, trembling and
beside herself. “To‐day, at once, or I’ll poison myself! That’s why I sent
for you.”

And she slammed the door quickly. The bolt clicked. Alyosha put the note
in his pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to Madame
Hohlakov; forgetting her, in fact. As soon as Alyosha had gone, Lise
unbolted the door, opened it a little, put her finger in the crack and
slammed the door with all her might, pinching her finger. Ten seconds
after, releasing her finger, she walked softly, slowly to her chair, sat
up straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at the
blood that oozed from under the nail. Her lips were quivering and she kept
whispering rapidly to herself:

“I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!”



Chapter IV. A Hymn And A Secret


It was quite late (days are short in November) when Alyosha rang at the
prison gate. It was beginning to get dusk. But Alyosha knew that he would
be admitted without difficulty. Things were managed in our little town, as
everywhere else. At first, of course, on the conclusion of the preliminary
inquiry, relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviews
with Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities. But later,
though the formalities were not relaxed, exceptions were made for some, at
least, of Mitya’s visitors. So much so, that sometimes the interviews with
the prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically
_tête‐à‐tête_.

These exceptions, however, were few in number; only Grushenka, Alyosha and
Rakitin were treated like this. But the captain of the police, Mihail
Mihailovitch, was very favorably disposed to Grushenka. His abuse of her
at Mokroe weighed on the old man’s conscience, and when he learned the
whole story, he completely changed his view of her. And strange to say,
though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt, yet after Mitya was once in
prison, the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him. “He
was a man of good heart, perhaps,” he thought, “who had come to grief from
drinking and dissipation.” His first horror had been succeeded by pity. As
for Alyosha, the police captain was very fond of him and had known him for
a long time. Rakitin, who had of late taken to coming very often to see
the prisoner, was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the “police
captain’s young ladies,” as he called them, and was always hanging about
their house. He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent,
too, who, though scrupulous in the performance of his duties, was a kind‐
hearted old man. Alyosha, again, had an intimate acquaintance of long
standing with the superintendent, who was fond of talking to him,
generally on sacred subjects. He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch, and stood in
awe of his opinion, though he was a great philosopher himself; “self‐
taught,” of course. But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him.
During the last year the old man had taken to studying the Apocryphal
Gospels, and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend.
He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hours
together with him and with the monks. So even if Alyosha were late at the
prison, he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was made
easy. Besides, every one in the prison, down to the humblest warder, had
grown used to Alyosha. The sentry, of course, did not trouble him so long
as the authorities were satisfied.

When Mitya was summoned from his cell, he always went downstairs, to the
place set aside for interviews. As Alyosha entered the room he came upon
Rakitin, who was just taking leave of Mitya. They were both talking
loudly. Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out, while Rakitin
seemed grumbling. Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha, especially of
late. He scarcely spoke to him, and bowed to him stiffly. Seeing Alyosha
enter now, he frowned and looked away, as though he were entirely absorbed
in buttoning his big, warm, fur‐trimmed overcoat. Then he began looking at
once for his umbrella.

“I must mind not to forget my belongings,” he muttered, simply to say
something.

“Mind you don’t forget other people’s belongings,” said Mitya, as a joke,
and laughed at once at his own wit. Rakitin fired up instantly.

“You’d better give that advice to your own family, who’ve always been a
slave‐driving lot, and not to Rakitin,” he cried, suddenly trembling with
anger.

“What’s the matter? I was joking,” cried Mitya. “Damn it all! They are all
like that,” he turned to Alyosha, nodding towards Rakitin’s hurriedly
retreating figure. “He was sitting here, laughing and cheerful, and all at
once he boils up like that. He didn’t even nod to you. Have you broken
with him completely? Why are you so late? I’ve not been simply waiting,
but thirsting for you the whole morning. But never mind. We’ll make up for
it now.”

“Why does he come here so often? Surely you are not such great friends?”
asked Alyosha. He, too, nodded at the door through which Rakitin had
disappeared.

“Great friends with Rakitin? No, not as much as that. Is it likely—a pig
like that? He considers I am ... a blackguard. They can’t understand a
joke either, that’s the worst of such people. They never understand a
joke, and their souls are dry, dry and flat; they remind me of prison
walls when I was first brought here. But he is a clever fellow, very
clever. Well, Alexey, it’s all over with me now.”

He sat down on the bench and made Alyosha sit down beside him.

“Yes, the trial’s to‐morrow. Are you so hopeless, brother?” Alyosha said,
with an apprehensive feeling.

“What are you talking about?” said Mitya, looking at him rather
uncertainly. “Oh, you mean the trial! Damn it all! Till now we’ve been
talking of things that don’t matter, about this trial, but I haven’t said
a word to you about the chief thing. Yes, the trial is to‐morrow; but it
wasn’t the trial I meant, when I said it was all over with me. Why do you
look at me so critically?”

“What do you mean, Mitya?”

“Ideas, ideas, that’s all! Ethics! What is ethics?”

“Ethics?” asked Alyosha, wondering.

“Yes; is it a science?”

“Yes, there is such a science ... but ... I confess I can’t explain to you
what sort of science it is.”

“Rakitin knows. Rakitin knows a lot, damn him! He’s not going to be a
monk. He means to go to Petersburg. There he’ll go in for criticism of an
elevating tendency. Who knows, he may be of use and make his own career,
too. Ough! they are first‐rate, these people, at making a career! Damn
ethics, I am done for, Alexey, I am, you man of God! I love you more than
any one. It makes my heart yearn to look at you. Who was Karl Bernard?”

“Karl Bernard?” Alyosha was surprised again.

“No, not Karl. Stay, I made a mistake. Claude Bernard. What was he?
Chemist or what?”

“He must be a savant,” answered Alyosha; “but I confess I can’t tell you
much about him, either. I’ve heard of him as a savant, but what sort I
don’t know.”

“Well, damn him, then! I don’t know either,” swore Mitya. “A scoundrel of
some sort, most likely. They are all scoundrels. And Rakitin will make his
way. Rakitin will get on anywhere; he is another Bernard. Ugh, these
Bernards! They are all over the place.”

“But what is the matter?” Alyosha asked insistently.

“He wants to write an article about me, about my case, and so begin his
literary career. That’s what he comes for; he said so himself. He wants to
prove some theory. He wants to say ‘he couldn’t help murdering his father,
he was corrupted by his environment,’ and so on. He explained it all to
me. He is going to put in a tinge of Socialism, he says. But there, damn
the fellow, he can put in a tinge if he likes, I don’t care. He can’t bear
Ivan, he hates him. He’s not fond of you, either. But I don’t turn him
out, for he is a clever fellow. Awfully conceited, though. I said to him
just now, ‘The Karamazovs are not blackguards, but philosophers; for all
true Russians are philosophers, and though you’ve studied, you are not a
philosopher—you are a low fellow.’ He laughed, so maliciously. And I said
to him, ‘_De ideabus non est disputandum_.’ Isn’t that rather good? I can
set up for being a classic, you see!” Mitya laughed suddenly.

“Why is it all over with you? You said so just now,” Alyosha interposed.

“Why is it all over with me? H’m!... The fact of it is ... if you take it
as a whole, I am sorry to lose God—that’s why it is.”

“What do you mean by ‘sorry to lose God’?”

“Imagine: inside, in the nerves, in the head—that is, these nerves are
there in the brain ... (damn them!) there are sort of little tails, the
little tails of those nerves, and as soon as they begin quivering ... that
is, you see, I look at something with my eyes and then they begin
quivering, those little tails ... and when they quiver, then an image
appears ... it doesn’t appear at once, but an instant, a second, passes
... and then something like a moment appears; that is, not a moment—devil
take the moment!—but an image; that is, an object, or an action, damn it!
That’s why I see and then think, because of those tails, not at all
because I’ve got a soul, and that I am some sort of image and likeness.
All that is nonsense! Rakitin explained it all to me yesterday, brother,
and it simply bowled me over. It’s magnificent, Alyosha, this science! A
new man’s arising—that I understand.... And yet I am sorry to lose God!”

“Well, that’s a good thing, anyway,” said Alyosha.

“That I am sorry to lose God? It’s chemistry, brother, chemistry! There’s
no help for it, your reverence, you must make way for chemistry. And
Rakitin does dislike God. Ough! doesn’t he dislike Him! That’s the sore
point with all of them. But they conceal it. They tell lies. They pretend.
‘Will you preach this in your reviews?’ I asked him. ‘Oh, well, if I did
it openly, they won’t let it through,’ he said. He laughed. ‘But what will
become of men then?’ I asked him, ‘without God and immortal life? All
things are lawful then, they can do what they like?’ ‘Didn’t you know?’ he
said laughing, ‘a clever man can do what he likes,’ he said. ‘A clever man
knows his way about, but you’ve put your foot in it, committing a murder,
and now you are rotting in prison.’ He says that to my face! A regular
pig! I used to kick such people out, but now I listen to them. He talks a
lot of sense, too. Writes well. He began reading me an article last week.
I copied out three lines of it. Wait a minute. Here it is.”

Mitya hurriedly pulled out a piece of paper from his pocket and read:

“ ‘In order to determine this question, it is above all essential to put
one’s personality in contradiction to one’s reality.’ Do you understand
that?”

“No, I don’t,” said Alyosha. He looked at Mitya and listened to him with
curiosity.

“I don’t understand either. It’s dark and obscure, but intellectual.
‘Every one writes like that now,’ he says, ‘it’s the effect of their
environment.’ They are afraid of the environment. He writes poetry, too,
the rascal. He’s written in honor of Madame Hohlakov’s foot. Ha ha ha!”

“I’ve heard about it,” said Alyosha.

“Have you? And have you heard the poem?”

“No.”

“I’ve got it. Here it is. I’ll read it to you. You don’t know—I haven’t
told you—there’s quite a story about it. He’s a rascal! Three weeks ago he
began to tease me. ‘You’ve got yourself into a mess, like a fool, for the
sake of three thousand, but I’m going to collar a hundred and fifty
thousand. I am going to marry a widow and buy a house in Petersburg.’ And
he told me he was courting Madame Hohlakov. She hadn’t much brains in her
youth, and now at forty she has lost what she had. ‘But she’s awfully
sentimental,’ he says; ‘that’s how I shall get hold of her. When I marry
her, I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper.’
And his mouth was simply watering, the beast, not for the widow, but for
the hundred and fifty thousand. And he made me believe it. He came to see
me every day. ‘She is coming round,’ he declared. He was beaming with
delight. And then, all of a sudden, he was turned out of the house.
Perhotin’s carrying everything before him, bravo! I could kiss the silly
old noodle for turning him out of the house. And he had written this
doggerel. ‘It’s the first time I’ve soiled my hands with writing poetry,’
he said. ‘It’s to win her heart, so it’s in a good cause. When I get hold
of the silly woman’s fortune, I can be of great social utility.’ They have
this social justification for every nasty thing they do! ‘Anyway it’s
better than your Pushkin’s poetry,’ he said, ‘for I’ve managed to advocate
enlightenment even in that.’ I understand what he means about Pushkin, I
quite see that, if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about
women’s feet. But wasn’t Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel! The vanity
of these fellows! ‘On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object
of my affections’—he thought of that for a title. He’s a waggish fellow.


    A captivating little foot,
    Though swollen and red and tender!
    The doctors come and plasters put,
    But still they cannot mend her.

    Yet, ’tis not for her foot I dread—
    A theme for Pushkin’s muse more fit—
    It’s not her foot, it is her head:
    I tremble for her loss of wit!

    For as her foot swells, strange to say,
    Her intellect is on the wane—
    Oh, for some remedy I pray
    That may restore both foot and brain!


He is a pig, a regular pig, but he’s very arch, the rascal! And he really
has put in a progressive idea. And wasn’t he angry when she kicked him
out! He was gnashing his teeth!”

“He’s taken his revenge already,” said Alyosha. “He’s written a paragraph
about Madame Hohlakov.”

And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in _Gossip_.

“That’s his doing, that’s his doing!” Mitya assented, frowning. “That’s
him! These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have been
written about Grushenka, for instance.... And about Katya, too.... H’m!”

He walked across the room with a harassed air.

“Brother, I cannot stay long,” Alyosha said, after a pause. “To‐morrow
will be a great and awful day for you, the judgment of God will be
accomplished ... I am amazed at you, you walk about here, talking of I
don’t know what ...”

“No, don’t be amazed at me,” Mitya broke in warmly. “Am I to talk of that
stinking dog? Of the murderer? We’ve talked enough of him. I don’t want to
say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta! God will kill him, you
will see. Hush!”

He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him. His eyes glowed.

“Rakitin wouldn’t understand it,” he began in a sort of exaltation; “but
you, you’ll understand it all. That’s why I was thirsting for you. You
see, there’s so much I’ve been wanting to tell you for ever so long, here,
within these peeling walls, but I haven’t said a word about what matters
most; the moment never seems to have come. Now I can wait no longer. I
must pour out my heart to you. Brother, these last two months I’ve found
in myself a new man. A new man has risen up in me. He was hidden in me,
but would never have come to the surface, if it hadn’t been for this blow
from heaven. I am afraid! And what do I care if I spend twenty years in
the mines, breaking ore with a hammer? I am not a bit afraid of that—it’s
something else I am afraid of now: that that new man may leave me. Even
there, in the mines, under‐ground, I may find a human heart in another
convict and murderer by my side, and I may make friends with him, for even
there one may live and love and suffer. One may thaw and revive a frozen
heart in that convict, one may wait upon him for years, and at last bring
up from the dark depths a lofty soul, a feeling, suffering creature; one
may bring forth an angel, create a hero! There are so many of them,
hundreds of them, and we are all to blame for them. Why was it I dreamed
of that ‘babe’ at such a moment? ‘Why is the babe so poor?’ That was a
sign to me at that moment. It’s for the babe I’m going. Because we are all
responsible for all. For all the ‘babes,’ for there are big children as
well as little children. All are ‘babes.’ I go for all, because some one
must go for all. I didn’t kill father, but I’ve got to go. I accept it.
It’s all come to me here, here, within these peeling walls. There are
numbers of them there, hundreds of them underground, with hammers in their
hands. Oh, yes, we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom, but
then, in our great sorrow, we shall rise again to joy, without which man
cannot live nor God exist, for God gives joy: it’s His privilege—a grand
one. Ah, man should be dissolved in prayer! What should I be underground
there without God? Rakitin’s laughing! If they drive God from the earth,
we shall shelter Him underground. One cannot exist in prison without God;
it’s even more impossible than out of prison. And then we men underground
will sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God, with Whom
is joy. Hail to God and His joy! I love Him!”

Mitya was almost gasping for breath as he uttered his wild speech. He
turned pale, his lips quivered, and tears rolled down his cheeks.

“Yes, life is full, there is life even underground,” he began again. “You
wouldn’t believe, Alexey, how I want to live now, what a thirst for
existence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peeling
walls. Rakitin doesn’t understand that; all he cares about is building a
house and letting flats. But I’ve been longing for you. And what is
suffering? I am not afraid of it, even if it were beyond reckoning. I am
not afraid of it now. I was afraid of it before. Do you know, perhaps I
won’t answer at the trial at all.... And I seem to have such strength in
me now, that I think I could stand anything, any suffering, only to be
able to say and to repeat to myself every moment, ‘I exist.’ In thousands
of agonies—I exist. I’m tormented on the rack—but I exist! Though I sit
alone on a pillar—I exist! I see the sun, and if I don’t see the sun, I
know it’s there. And there’s a whole life in that, in knowing that the sun
is there. Alyosha, my angel, all these philosophies are the death of me.
Damn them! Brother Ivan—”

“What of brother Ivan?” interrupted Alyosha, but Mitya did not hear.

“You see, I never had any of these doubts before, but it was all hidden
away in me. It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were
surging up in me, that I used to drink and fight and rage. It was to
stifle them in myself, to still them, to smother them. Ivan is not
Rakitin, there is an idea in him. Ivan is a sphinx and is silent; he is
always silent. It’s God that’s worrying me. That’s the only thing that’s
worrying me. What if He doesn’t exist? What if Rakitin’s right—that it’s
an idea made up by men? Then if He doesn’t exist, man is the chief of the
earth, of the universe. Magnificent! Only how is he going to be good
without God? That’s the question. I always come back to that. For whom is
man going to love then? To whom will he be thankful? To whom will he sing
the hymn? Rakitin laughs. Rakitin says that one can love humanity without
God. Well, only a sniveling idiot can maintain that. I can’t understand
it. Life’s easy for Rakitin. ‘You’d better think about the extension of
civic rights, or even of keeping down the price of meat. You will show
your love for humanity more simply and directly by that, than by
philosophy.’ I answered him, ‘Well, but you, without a God, are more
likely to raise the price of meat, if it suits you, and make a rouble on
every copeck.’ He lost his temper. But after all, what is goodness? Answer
me that, Alexey. Goodness is one thing with me and another with a
Chinaman, so it’s a relative thing. Or isn’t it? Is it not relative? A
treacherous question! You won’t laugh if I tell you it’s kept me awake two
nights. I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it.
Vanity! Ivan has no God. He has an idea. It’s beyond me. But he is silent.
I believe he is a free‐mason. I asked him, but he is silent. I wanted to
drink from the springs of his soul—he was silent. But once he did drop a
word.”

“What did he say?” Alyosha took it up quickly.

“I said to him, ‘Then everything is lawful, if it is so?’ He frowned.
‘Fyodor Pavlovitch, our papa,’ he said, ‘was a pig, but his ideas were
right enough.’ That was what he dropped. That was all he said. That was
going one better than Rakitin.”

“Yes,” Alyosha assented bitterly. “When was he with you?”

“Of that later; now I must speak of something else. I have said nothing
about Ivan to you before. I put it off to the last. When my business here
is over and the verdict has been given, then I’ll tell you something. I’ll
tell you everything. We’ve something tremendous on hand.... And you shall
be my judge in it. But don’t begin about that now; be silent. You talk of
to‐morrow, of the trial; but, would you believe it, I know nothing about
it.”

“Have you talked to the counsel?”

“What’s the use of the counsel? I told him all about it. He’s a soft,
city‐bred rogue—a Bernard! But he doesn’t believe me—not a bit of it. Only
imagine, he believes I did it. I see it. ‘In that case,’ I asked him, ‘why
have you come to defend me?’ Hang them all! They’ve got a doctor down,
too, want to prove I’m mad. I won’t have that! Katerina Ivanovna wants to
do her ‘duty’ to the end, whatever the strain!” Mitya smiled bitterly.
“The cat! Hard‐hearted creature! She knows that I said of her at Mokroe
that she was a woman of ‘great wrath.’ They repeated it. Yes, the facts
against me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea. Grigory sticks to
his point. Grigory’s honest, but a fool. Many people are honest because
they are fools: that’s Rakitin’s idea. Grigory’s my enemy. And there are
some people who are better as foes than friends. I mean Katerina Ivanovna.
I am afraid, oh, I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the ground
after that four thousand. She’ll pay it back to the last farthing. I don’t
want her sacrifice; they’ll put me to shame at the trial. I wonder how I
can stand it. Go to her, Alyosha, ask her not to speak of that in the
court, can’t you? But damn it all, it doesn’t matter! I shall get through
somehow. I don’t pity her. It’s her own doing. She deserves what she gets.
I shall have my own story to tell, Alexey.” He smiled bitterly again.
“Only ... only Grusha, Grusha! Good Lord! Why should she have such
suffering to bear?” he exclaimed suddenly, with tears. “Grusha’s killing
me; the thought of her’s killing me, killing me. She was with me just
now....”

“She told me she was very much grieved by you to‐day.”

“I know. Confound my temper! It was jealousy. I was sorry, I kissed her as
she was going. I didn’t ask her forgiveness.”

“Why didn’t you?” exclaimed Alyosha.

Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully.

“God preserve you, my dear boy, from ever asking forgiveness for a fault
from a woman you love. From one you love especially, however greatly you
may have been in fault. For a woman—devil only knows what to make of a
woman! I know something about them, anyway. But try acknowledging you are
in fault to a woman. Say, ‘I am sorry, forgive me,’ and a shower of
reproaches will follow! Nothing will make her forgive you simply and
directly, she’ll humble you to the dust, bring forward things that have
never happened, recall everything, forget nothing, add something of her
own, and only then forgive you. And even the best, the best of them do it.
She’ll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head. They are
ready to flay you alive, I tell you, every one of them, all these angels
without whom we cannot live! I tell you plainly and openly, dear boy,
every decent man ought to be under some woman’s thumb. That’s my
conviction—not conviction, but feeling. A man ought to be magnanimous, and
it’s no disgrace to a man! No disgrace to a hero, not even a Cæsar! But
don’t ever beg her pardon all the same for anything. Remember that rule
given you by your brother Mitya, who’s come to ruin through women. No, I’d
better make it up to Grusha somehow, without begging pardon. I worship
her, Alexey, worship her. Only she doesn’t see it. No, she still thinks I
don’t love her enough. And she tortures me, tortures me with her love. The
past was nothing! In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers
that tortured me, but now I’ve taken all her soul into my soul and through
her I’ve become a man myself. Will they marry us? If they don’t, I shall
die of jealousy. I imagine something every day.... What did she say to you
about me?”

Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day. Mitya listened,
