unexpectedness but from its fateful coincidence with the present moment.
Even the captain remained standing like a post in the middle of the room
with his mouth wide open, staring at the door with a fearfully stupid
expression.

And, behold, from the next room--a very large and long apartment--came
the sound of swiftly approaching footsteps, little, exceedingly rapid
steps; some one seemed to be running, and that some one suddenly flew
into the drawing-room, not Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but a young man who
was a complete stranger to all.


V

I will permit myself to halt here to sketch in a few hurried strokes
this person who had so suddenly arrived on the scene.

He was a young man of twenty-seven or thereabouts, a little above the
medium height, with rather long, lank, flaxen hair, and with faintly
defined, irregular moustache and beard. He was dressed neatly, and in
the fashion, though not like a dandy. At the first glance he looked
round-shouldered and awkward, but yet he was not round-shouldered, and
his manner was easy. He seemed a queer fish, and yet later on we all
thought his manners good, and his conversation always to the point.

No one would have said that he was ugly, and yet no one would have liked
his face. His head was elongated at the back, and looked flattened at
the sides, so that his face seemed pointed, his forehead was high and
narrow, but his features were small; his eyes were keen, his nose was
small and sharp, his lips were long and thin. The expression of his face
suggested ill-health, but this was misleading. He had a wrinkle on each
cheek which gave him the look of a man who had just recovered from a
serious illness. Yet he was perfectly well and strong, and had never
been ill.

He walked and moved very hurriedly, yet never seemed in a hurry to
be off. It seemed as though nothing could disconcert him; in every
circumstance and in every sort of society he remained the same. He had a
great deal of conceit, but was utterly unaware of it himself.

He talked quickly, hurriedly, but at the same time with assurance, and
was never at a loss for a word. In spite of his hurried manner his ideas
were in perfect order, distinct and definite--and this was particularly
striking. His articulation was wonderfully clear. His words pattered out
like smooth, big grains, always well chosen, and at your service.
At first this attracted one, but afterwards it became repulsive, just
because of this over-distinct articulation, this string of ever-ready
words.  One somehow began to imagine that he must have a tongue of
special shape, somehow exceptionally long and thin, extremely red with a
very sharp everlastingly active little tip.

Well, this was the young man who darted now into the drawing-room, and
really, I believe to this day, that he began to talk in the next room,
and came in speaking. He was standing before Varvara Petrovna in a
trice.

"... Only fancy, Varvara Petrovna," he pattered on, "I came in expecting
to find he'd been here for the last quarter of an hour; he arrived an
hour and a half ago; we met at Kirillov's: he set off half an hour ago
meaning to come straight here, and told me to come here too, a quarter
of an hour later...."

"But who? Who told you to come here?" Varvara Petrovna inquired.

"Why, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch! Surely this isn't the first you've heard
of it! But his luggage must have been here a long while, anyway. How
is it you weren't told? Then I'm the first to bring the news. One might
send out to look for him; he's sure to be here himself directly
though. And I fancy, at the moment that just fits in with some of
his expectations, and is far as I can judge, at least, some of his
calculations."

At this point he turned his eyes about the room and fixed them with
special attention on the captain.

"Ach, Lizaveta Nikolaevna, how glad I am to meet you at the very first
step, delighted to shake hands with you." He flew up to Liza, who
was smiling gaily, to take her proffered hand, "and I observe that my
honoured friend Praskovya Ivanovna has not forgotten her 'professor,'
and actually isn't cross with him, as she always used to be in
Switzerland. But how are your legs, here, Praskovya Ivanovna, and were
the Swiss doctors right when at the consultation they prescribed your
native air? What? Fomentations? That ought to do good. But how sorry I
was, Varvara Petrovna" (he turned rapidly to her) "that I didn't arrive
in time to meet you abroad, and offer my respects to you in person; I
had so much to tell you too. I did send word to my old man here, but I
fancy that he did as he always does..."

"Petrusha!" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, instantly roused from his
stupefaction. He clasped his hands and flew to his son. "_Pierre, mon
enfant!_ Why, I didn't know you!" He pressed him in his arms and the
tears rolled down his cheeks.

"Come, be quiet, be quiet, no flourishes, that's enough, that's enough,
please," Petrusha muttered hurriedly, trying to extricate himself from
his embrace.

"I've always sinned against you, always!"

"Well, that's enough. We can talk of that later. I knew you'd carry on.
Come, be a little more sober, please."

"But it's ten years since I've seen you."

"The less reason for demonstrations."

_"Mon enfant!..."_

"Come, I believe in your affection, I believe in it, take your arms
away. You see, you're disturbing other people.... Ah, here's Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch; keep quiet, please."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was already in the room; he came in very quietly
and stood still for an instant in the doorway, quietly scrutinising the
company.

I was struck by the first sight of him just as I had been four years
before, when I saw him for the first time. I had not forgotten him in
the least. But I think there are some countenances which always seem to
exhibit something new which one has not noticed before, every time
one meets them, though one may have seen them a hundred times already.
Apparently he was exactly the same as he had been four years before. He
was as elegant, as dignified, he moved with the same air of consequence
as before, indeed he looked almost as young. His faint smile had just
the same official graciousness and complacency. His eyes had the same
stern, thoughtful and, as it were, preoccupied look. In fact, it seemed
as though we had only parted the day before. But one thing struck me. In
old days, though he had been considered handsome, his face was "like a
mask," as some of our sharp-tongued ladies had expressed it. Now--now,
I don't know why he impressed me at once as absolutely, incontestably
beautiful, so that no one could have said that his face was like a mask.
Wasn't it perhaps that he was a little paler and seemed rather thinner
than before? Or was there, perhaps, the light of some new idea in his
eyes?

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!" cried Varvara Petrovna, drawing herself up
but not rising from her chair. "Stop a minute!" She checked his advance
with a peremptory gesture.

But to explain the awful question which immediately followed that
gesture and exclamation--a question which I should have imagined to be
impossible even in Varvara Petrovna, I must ask the reader to remember
what that lady's temperament had always been, and the extraordinary
impulsiveness she showed at some critical moments. I beg him to consider
also, that in spite of the exceptional strength of her spirit and
the very considerable amount of common sense and practical, so to say
business, tact she possessed, there were moments in her life in which
she abandoned herself altogether, entirely and, if it's permissible
to say so, absolutely without restraint. I beg him to take into
consideration also that the present moment might really be for her one
of those in which all the essence of life, of all the past and all the
present, perhaps, too, all the future, is concentrated, as it were,
focused. I must briefly recall, too, the anonymous letter of which she
had spoken to Praskovya Ivanovna with so much irritation, though I think
she said nothing of the latter part of it. Yet it perhaps contained the
explanation of the possibility of the terrible question with which she
suddenly addressed her son.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch," she repeated, rapping out her words in a
resolute voice in which there was a ring of menacing challenge, "I beg
you to tell me at once, without moving from that place; is it true that
this unhappy cripple--here she is, here, look at her--is it true that
she is... your lawful wife?"

I remember that moment only too well; he did not wink an eyelash but
looked intently at his mother. Not the faintest change in his face
followed. At last he smiled, a sort of indulgent smile, and without
answering a word went quietly up to his mother, took her hand, raised it
respectfully to his lips and kissed it. And so great was his invariable
and irresistible ascendancy over his mother that even now she could not
bring herself to pull away her hand. She only gazed at him, her whole
figure one concentrated question, seeming to betray that she could not
bear the suspense another moment.

But he was still silent. When he had kissed her hand, he scanned the
whole room once more, and moving, as before, without haste went towards
Marya Timofyevna. It is very difficult to describe people's countenances
at certain moments. I remember, for instance, that Marya Timofyevna,
breathless with fear, rose to her feet to meet him and clasped her hands
before her, as though beseeching him. And at the same time I remember
the frantic ecstasy which almost distorted her face--an ecstasy almost
too great for any human being to bear. Perhaps both were there, both the
terror and the ecstasy. But I remember moving quickly towards her (I was
standing not far off), for I fancied she was going to faint.

"You should not be here," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch said to her in
a caressing and melodious voice; and there was the light of an
extraordinary tenderness in his eyes. He stood before her in the most
respectful attitude, and every gesture showed sincere respect for her.
The poor girl faltered impulsively in a half-whisper.

"But may I... kneel down... to you now?"

"No, you can't do that."

He smiled at her magnificently, so that she too laughed joyfully at
once. In the same melodious voice, coaxing her tenderly as though she
were a child, he went on gravely.

"Only think that you are a girl, and that though I'm your devoted friend
I'm an outsider, not your husband, nor your father, nor your betrothed.
Give me your arm and let us go; I will take you to the carriage, and if
you will let me I will see you all the way home."

She listened, and bent her head as though meditating.

"Let's go," she said with a sigh, giving him her hand.

But at that point a slight mischance befell her. She must have turned
carelessly, resting on her lame leg, which was shorter than the other.
She fell sideways into the chair, and if the chair had not been there
would have fallen on to the floor. He instantly seized and supported
her, and holding her arm firmly in his, led her carefully and
sympathetically to the door. She was evidently mortified at having
fallen; she was overwhelmed, blushed, and was terribly abashed. Looking
dumbly on the ground, limping painfully, she hobbled after him, almost
hanging on his arm. So they went out. Liza, I saw, suddenly jumped up
from her chair for some reason as they were going out, and she followed
them with intent eyes till they reached the door. Then she sat down
again in silence, but there was a nervous twitching in her face, as
though she had touched a viper.

While this scene was taking place between Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and
Marya Timofyevna every one was speechless with amazement; one could have
heard a fly; but as soon as they had gone out, every one began suddenly
talking.


VI

It was very little of it talk, however; it was mostly exclamation. I've
forgotten a little the order in which things happened, for a scene of
confusion followed. Stepan Trofimovitch uttered some exclamation in
French, clasping his hands, but Varvara Petrovna had no thought for him.
Even Mavriky Nikolaevitch muttered some rapid, jerky comment. But Pyotr
Stepanovitch was the most excited of all. He was trying desperately with
bold gesticulations to persuade Varvara Petrovna of something, but it
was a long time before I could make out what it was. He appealed
to Praskovya Ivanovna, and Lizaveta Nikolaevna too, even, in his
excitement, addressed a passing shout to his father--in fact he seemed
all over the room at once. Varvara Petrovna, flushing all over, sprang
up from her seat and cried to Praskovya Ivanovna:

"Did you hear what he said to her here just now, did you hear it?"

But the latter was incapable of replying. She could only mutter
something and wave her hand. The poor woman had troubles of her own to
think about. She kept turning her head towards Liza and was watching her
with unaccountable terror, but she didn't even dare to think of getting
up and going away until her daughter should get up. In the meantime the
captain wanted to slip away. That I noticed. There was no doubt that he
had been in a great panic from the instant that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
had made his appearance; but Pyotr Stepanovitch took him by the arm and
would not let him go.

"It is necessary, quite necessary," he pattered on to Varvara Petrovna,
still trying to persuade her. He stood facing her, as she was sitting
down again in her easy chair, and, I remember, was listening to him
eagerly; he had succeeded in securing her attention.

"It is necessary. You can see for yourself, Varvara Petrovna, that there
is a misunderstanding here, and much that is strange on the surface,
and yet the thing's as clear as daylight, and as simple as my finger. I
quite understand that no one has authorised me to tell the story, and
I dare say I look ridiculous putting myself forward. But in the first
place, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch attaches no sort of significance to
the matter himself, and, besides, there are incidents of which it is
difficult for a man to make up his mind to give an explanation himself.
And so it's absolutely necessary that it should be undertaken by a third
person, for whom it's easier to put some delicate points into words.
Believe me, Varvara Petrovna, that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch is not at
all to blame for not immediately answering your question just now with
a full explanation, it's all a trivial affair. I've known him since his
Petersburg days. Besides, the whole story only does honour to Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, if one must make use of that vague word 'honour.'"

"You mean to say that you were a witness of some incident which gave
rise... to this misunderstanding?" asked Varvara Petrovna.

"I witnessed it, and took part in it," Pyotr Stepanovitch hastened to
declare.

"If you'll give me your word that this will not wound Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch's delicacy in regard to his feeling for me, from whom
he ne-e-ver conceals anything... and if you are convinced also that your
doing this will be agreeable to him..."

"Certainly it will be agreeable, and for that reason I consider it a
particularly agreeable duty. I am convinced that he would beg me to do
it himself."

The intrusive desire of this gentleman, who seemed to have dropped on
us from heaven to tell stories about other people's affairs, was rather
strange and inconsistent with ordinary usage.

But he had caught Varvara Petrovna by touching on too painful a spot.
I did not know the man's character at that time, and still less his
designs.

"I am listening," Varvara Petrovna announced with a reserved and
cautious manner. She was rather painfully aware of her condescension.

"It's a short story; in fact if you like it's not a story at all," he
rattled on, "though a novelist might work it up into a novel in an idle
hour. It's rather an interesting little incident, Praskovya Ivanovna,
and I am sure that Lizaveta Nikolaevna will be interested to hear
it, because there are a great many things in it that are odd if not
wonderful. Five years ago, in Petersburg, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
made the acquaintance of this gentleman, this very Mr. Lebyadkin who's
standing here with his mouth open, anxious, I think, to slip away at
once. Excuse me, Varvara Petrovna. I don't advise you to make your
escape though, you discharged clerk in the former commissariat
department; you see, I remember you very well. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
and I know very well what you've been up to here, and, don't forget,
you'll have to answer for it. I ask your pardon once more, Varvara
Petrovna. In those days Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch used to call this
gentleman his Falstaff; that must be," he explained suddenly, "some old
burlesque character, at whom every one laughs, and who is willing to
let every one laugh at him, if only they'll pay him for it. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was leading at that time in Petersburg a life, so to
say, of mockery. I can't find another word to describe it, because he
is not a man who falls into disillusionment, and he disdained to be
occupied with work at that time. I'm only speaking of that period,
Varvara Petrovna. Lebyadkin had a sister, the woman who was sitting here
just now. The brother and sister hadn't a corner* of their own, but
were always quartering themselves on different people. He used to hang
about the arcades in the Gostiny Dvor, always wearing his old uniform,
and would stop the more respectable-looking passers-by, and everything
he got from them he'd spend in drink. His sister lived like the birds
of heaven. She'd help people in their 'corners,' and do jobs for them
on occasion. It was a regular Bedlam. I'll pass over the description
of this life in 'corners,' a life to which Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had
taken,"

     * In the poorer quarters of Russian towns a single room is often
     let out to several families, each of which occupies a "corner."

"at that time, from eccentricity. I'm only talking of that period,
Varvara Petrovna; as for 'eccentricity,' that's his own expression. He
does not conceal much from me. Mlle. Lebyadkin, who was thrown in the
way of meeting Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch very often, at one time, was
fascinated by his appearance. He was, so to say, a diamond set in the
dirty background of her life. I am a poor hand at describing feelings,
so I'll pass them over; but some of that dirty lot took to jeering at
her once, and it made her sad. They always had laughed at her, but she
did not seem to notice it before. She wasn't quite right in her head
even then, but very different from what she is now. There's reason to
believe that in her childhood she received something like an education
through the kindness of a benevolent lady. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
had never taken the slightest notice of her. He used to spend his time
chiefly in playing preference with a greasy old pack of cards for
stakes of a quarter-farthing with clerks. But once, when she was being
ill-treated, he went up (without inquiring into the cause) and seized
one of the clerks by the collar and flung him out of a second-floor
window. It was not a case of chivalrous indignation at the sight of
injured innocence; the whole operation took place in the midst of roars
of laughter, and the one who laughed loudest was Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
himself. As it all ended without harm, they were reconciled and began
drinking punch. But the injured innocent herself did not forget it. Of
course it ended in her becoming completely crazy. I repeat I'm a poor
hand at describing feelings. But a delusion was the chief feature in
this case. And Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch aggravated that delusion as
though he did it on purpose. Instead of laughing at her he began all
at once treating Mlle. Lebyadkin with sudden respect. Kirillov, who was
there (a very original man, Varvara Petrovna, and very abrupt, you'll
see him perhaps one day, for he's here now), well, this Kirillov who,
as a rule, is perfectly silent, suddenly got hot, and said to Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, I remember, that he treated the girl as though she were
a marquise, and that that was doing for her altogether. I must add that
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had rather a respect for this Kirillov. What do
you suppose was the answer he gave him: 'You imagine, Mr. Kirillov, that
I am laughing at her. Get rid of that idea, I really do respect her,
for she's better than any of us.' And, do you know, he said it in such a
serious tone. Meanwhile, he hadn't really said a word to her for two or
three months, except 'good morning' and 'good-bye.' I remember, for I
was there, that she came at last to the point of looking on him almost
as her betrothed who dared not 'elope with her,' simply because he had
many enemies and family difficulties, or something of the sort.
There was a great deal of laughter about it. It ended in Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch's making provision for her when he had to come here, and
I believe he arranged to pay a considerable sum, three hundred roubles a
year, if not more, as a pension for her. In short it was all a caprice,
a fancy of a man prematurely weary on his side, perhaps--it may even
have been, as Kirillov says, a new experiment of a blasé man, with
the object of finding out what you can bring a crazy cripple to." (You
picked out on purpose, he said, the lowest creature, a cripple, for ever
covered with disgrace and blows, knowing, too, that this creature was
dying of comic love for you, and set to work to mystify her completely
on purpose, simply to see what would come of it.) "Though, how is a man
so particularly to blame for the fancies of a crazy woman, to whom
he had hardly uttered two sentences the whole time. There are things,
Varvara Petrovna, of which it is not only impossible to speak sensibly,
but it's even nonsensical to begin speaking of them at all. Well,
eccentricity then, let it stand at that. Anyway, there's nothing worse
to be said than that; and yet now they've made this scandal out of it.
... I am to some extent aware, Varvara Petrovna, of what is happening
here."

The speaker suddenly broke off and was turning to Lebyadkin. But Varvara
Petrovna checked him. She was in a state of extreme exaltation.

"Have you finished?" she asked.

"Not yet; to complete my story I should have to ask this gentleman one
or two questions if you'll allow me... you'll see the point in a minute,
Varvara Petrovna."

"Enough, afterwards, leave it for the moment I beg you. Oh, I was quite
right to let you speak!"

"And note this, Varvara Petrovna," Pyotr Stepanovitch said hastily.
"Could Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch have explained all this just now in
answer to your question, which was perhaps too peremptory?"

"Oh, yes, it was."

"And wasn't I right in saying that in some cases it's much easier for a
third person to explain things than for the person interested?"

"Yes, yes... but in one thing you were mistaken, and, I see with regret,
are still mistaken."

"Really, what's that?"

"You see.... But won't you sit down, Pyotr Stepanovitch?"

"Oh, as you please. I am tired indeed. Thank you." He instantly moved up
an easy chair and turned it so that he had Varvara Petrovna on one
side and Praskovya Ivanovna at the table on the other, while he faced
Lebyadkin, from whom he did not take his eyes for one minute.

"You are mistaken in calling this eccentricity...."

"Oh, if it's only that...."

"No, no, no, wait a little," said Varvara Petrovna, who was obviously
about to say a good deal and to speak with enthusiasm. As soon as Pyotr
Stepanovitch noticed it, he was all attention.

"No, it was something higher than eccentricity, and I assure you,
something sacred even! A proud man who has suffered humiliation early
in life and reached the stage of 'mockery' as you so subtly called
it--Prince Harry, in fact, to use the capital nickname Stepan
Trofimovitch gave him then, which would have been perfectly correct if
it were not that he is more like Hamlet, to my thinking at least."

_"Et vous avez raison,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch pronounced, impressively and
with feeling.

"Thank you, Stepan Trofimovitch. I thank you particularly too for your
unvarying faith in Nicolas, in the loftiness of his soul and of his
destiny. That faith you have even strengthened in me when I was losing
heart."

_"Chère, chère."_ Stepan Trofimovitch was stepping forward, when he
checked himself, reflecting that it was dangerous to interrupt.

"And if Nicolas had always had at his side" (Varvara Petrovna almost
shouted) "a gentle Horatio, great in his humility--another excellent
expression of yours, Stepan Trofimovitch--he might long ago have been
saved from the sad and 'sudden demon of irony,' which has tormented him
all his life. ('The demon of irony' was a wonderful expression of yours
again, Stepan Trofimovitch.) But Nicolas has never had an Horatio or an
Ophelia. He had no one but his mother, and what can a mother do alone,
and in such circumstances? Do you know, Pyotr Stepanovitch, it's
perfectly comprehensible to me now that a being like Nicolas could be
found even in such filthy haunts as you have described. I can so clearly
picture now that 'mockery' of life. (A wonderfully subtle expression
of yours!) That insatiable thirst of contrast, that gloomy background
against which he stands out like a diamond, to use your comparison
again, Pyotr Stepanovitch. And then he meets there a creature
ill-treated by every one, crippled, half insane, and at the same time
perhaps filled with noble feelings."

"H'm.... Yes, perhaps."

"And after that you don't understand that he's not laughing at her like
every one. Oh, you people! You can't understand his defending her from
insult, treating her with respect 'like a marquise' (this Kirillov
must have an exceptionally deep understanding of men, though he didn't
understand Nicolas). It was just this contrast, if you like, that led to
the trouble. If the unhappy creature had been in different surroundings,
perhaps she would never have been brought to entertain such a frantic
delusion. Only a woman can understand it, Pyotr Stepanovitch, only a
woman. How sorry I am that you... not that you're not a woman, but that
you can't be one just for the moment so as to understand."

"You mean in the sense that the worse things are the better it is. I
understand, I understand, Varvara Petrovna. It's rather as it is in
religion; the harder life is for a man or the more crushed and poor the
people are, the more obstinately they dream of compensation in heaven;
and if a hundred thousand priests are at work at it too, inflaming
their delusion, and speculating on it, then... I understand you, Varvara
Petrovna, I assure you."

"That's not quite it; but tell me, ought Nicolas to have laughed at her
and have treated her as the other clerks, in order to extinguish the
delusion in this unhappy organism." (Why Varvara Petrovna used the word
organism I couldn't understand.) "Can you really refuse to recognise
the lofty compassion, the noble tremor of the whole organism with which
Nicolas answered Kirillov: 'I do not laugh at her.' A noble, sacred
answer!"

"Sublime," muttered Stepan Trofimovitch.

"And observe, too, that he is by no means so rich as you suppose. The
money is mine and not his, and he would take next to nothing from me
then."

"I understand, I understand all that, Varvara Petrovna," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, with a movement of some impatience.

"Oh, it's my character! I recognise myself in Nicolas. I recognise that
youthfulness, that liability to violent, tempestuous impulses. And if
we ever come to be friends, Pyotr Stepanovitch, and, for my part, I
sincerely hope we may, especially as I am so deeply indebted to you,
then, perhaps you'll understand...."

"Oh, I assure you, I hope for it too," Pyotr Stepanovitch muttered
jerkily.

"You'll understand then the impulse which leads one in the blindness
of generous feeling to take up a man who is unworthy of one in every
respect, a man who utterly fails to understand one, who is ready to
torture one at every opportunity and, in contradiction to everything, to
exalt such a man into a sort of ideal, into a dream. To concentrate in
him all one's hopes, to bow down before him; to love him all one's life,
absolutely without knowing why--perhaps just because he was unworthy of
it.... Oh, how I've suffered all my life, Pyotr Stepanovitch!"

Stepan Trofimovitch, with a look of suffering on his face, began trying
to catch my eye, but I turned away in time.

"... And only lately, only lately--oh, how unjust I've been to Nicolas!
... You would not believe how they have been worrying me on all sides,
all, all, enemies, and rascals, and friends, friends perhaps more than
enemies. When the first contemptible anonymous letter was sent to me,
Pyotr Stepanovitch, you'll hardly believe it, but I had not strength
enough to treat all this wickedness with contempt.... I shall never,
never forgive myself for my weakness."

"I had heard something of anonymous letters here already," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, growing suddenly more lively, "and I'll find out the
writers of them, you may be sure."

"But you can't imagine the intrigues that have been got up here. They
have even been pestering our poor Praskovya Ivanovna, and what reason
can they have for worrying her? I was quite unfair to you to-day
perhaps, my dear Praskovya Ivanovna," she added in a generous impulse of
kindliness, though not without a certain triumphant irony.

"Don't say any more, my dear," the other lady muttered reluctantly.
"To my thinking we'd better make an end of all this; too much has been
said."

And again she looked timidly towards Liza, but the latter was looking at
Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"And I intend now to adopt this poor unhappy creature, this insane
woman who has lost everything and kept only her heart," Varvara Petrovna
exclaimed suddenly. "It's a sacred duty I intend to carry out. I take
her under my protection from this day."

"And that will be a very good thing in one way," Pyotr Stepanovitch
cried, growing quite eager again. "Excuse me, I did not finish just now.
It's just the care of her I want to speak of. Would you believe it, that
as soon as Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had gone (I'm beginning from where
I left off, Varvara Petrovna), this gentleman here, this Mr. Lebyadkin,
instantly imagined he had the right to dispose of the whole pension
that was provided for his sister. And he did dispose of it. I don't
know exactly how it had been arranged by Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at that
time. But a year later, when he learned from abroad what had happened,
he was obliged to make other arrangements. Again, I don't know the
details; he'll tell you them himself. I only know that the interesting
young person was placed somewhere in a remote nunnery, in very
comfortable surroundings, but under friendly superintendence--you
understand? But what do you think Mr. Lebyadkin made up his mind to do?
He exerted himself to the utmost, to begin with, to find where
his source of income, that is his sister, was hidden. Only lately he
attained his object, took her from the nunnery, asserting some claim to
her, and brought her straight here. Here he doesn't feed her properly,
beats her, and bullies her. As soon as by some means he gets a
considerable sum from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, he does nothing but
get drunk, and instead of gratitude ends by impudently defying Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, making senseless demands, threatening him with
proceedings if the pension is not paid straight into his hands. So
he takes what is a voluntary gift from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch as a
tax--can you imagine it? Mr. Lebyadkin, is that all true that I have
said just now?"

The captain, who had till that moment stood in silence looking down,
took two rapid steps forward and turned crimson.

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, you've treated me cruelly," he brought out
abruptly.

"Why cruelly? How? But allow us to discuss the question of cruelty or
gentleness later on. Now answer my first question; is it true all that I
have said or not? If you consider it's false you are at liberty to give
your own version at once."

"I... you know yourself, Pyotr Stepanovitch," the captain muttered, but
he could not go on and relapsed into silence. It must be observed that
Pyotr Stepanovitch was sitting in an easy chair with one leg crossed
over the other, while the captain stood before him in the most
respectful attitude.

Lebyadkin's hesitation seemed to annoy Pyotr Stepanovitch; a spasm of
anger distorted his face.

"Then you have a statement you want to make?" he said, looking subtly at
the captain. "Kindly speak. We're waiting for you."

"You know yourself Pyotr Stepanovitch, that I can't say anything."

"No, I don't know it. It's the first time I've heard it. Why can't you
speak?"

The captain was silent, with his eyes on the ground.

"Allow me to go, Pyotr Stepanovitch," he brought out resolutely.

"No, not till you answer my question: is it all true that I've said?"

"It is true," Lebyadkin brought out in a hollow voice, looking at his
tormentor. Drops of perspiration stood out on his forehead.

"Is it _all_ true?"

"It's all true."

"Have you nothing to add or to observe? If you think that we've been
unjust, say so; protest, state your grievance aloud."

"No, I think nothing."

"Did you threaten Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch lately?"

"It was... it was more drink than anything, Pyotr Stepanovitch." He
suddenly raised his head. "If family honour and undeserved disgrace
cry out among men then--then is a man to blame?" he roared suddenly,
forgetting himself as before.

"Are you sober now, Mr. Lebyadkin?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at him penetratingly.

"I am... sober."

"What do you mean by family honour and undeserved disgrace?"

"I didn't mean anybody, anybody at all. I meant myself," the captain
said, collapsing again.

"You seem to be very much offended by what I've said about you and your
conduct? You are very irritable, Mr. Lebyadkin. But let me tell you I've
hardly begun yet what I've got to say about your conduct, in its real
sense. I'll begin to discuss your conduct in its real sense. I shall
begin, that may very well happen, but so far I've not begun, in a real
sense."

Lebyadkin started and stared wildly at Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, I am just beginning to wake up."

"H'm! And it's I who have waked you up?"

"Yes, it's you who have waked me, Pyotr Stepanovitch; and I've been
asleep for the last four years with a storm-cloud hanging over me. May I
withdraw at last, Pyotr Stepanovitch?"

"Now you may, unless Varvara Petrovna thinks it necessary..."

But the latter dismissed him with a wave of her hand.

The captain bowed, took two steps towards the door, stopped suddenly,
laid his hand on his heart, tried to say something, did not say it, and
was moving quickly away. But in the doorway he came face to face with
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch; the latter stood aside. The captain shrank into
himself, as it were, before him, and stood as though frozen to the spot,
his eyes fixed upon him like a rabbit before a boa-constrictor. After
a little pause Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch waved him aside with a slight
motion of his hand, and walked into the drawing-room.


VII

He was cheerful and serene. Perhaps something very pleasant had happened
to him, of which we knew nothing as yet; but he seemed particularly
contented.

"Do you forgive me, Nicolas?" Varvara Petrovna hastened to say, and got
up suddenly to meet him.

But Nicolas positively laughed.

"Just as I thought," he said, good-humouredly and jestingly. "I see you
know all about it already. When I had gone from here I reflected in the
carriage that I ought at least to have told you the story instead of
going off like that. But when I remembered that Pyotr Stepanovitch was
still here, I thought no more of it."

As he spoke he took a cursory look round.

"Pyotr Stepanovitch told us an old Petersburg episode in the life of a
queer fellow," Varvara Petrovna rejoined enthusiastically--"a mad
and capricious fellow, though always lofty in his feelings, always
chivalrous and noble...."

"Chivalrous? You don't mean to say it's come to that," laughed Nicolas.
"However, I'm very grateful to Pyotr Stepanovitch for being in such a
hurry this time." He exchanged a rapid glance with the latter. "You must
know, maman, that Pyotr Stepanovitch is the universal peacemaker; that's
his part in life, his weakness, his hobby, and I particularly recommend
him to you from that point of view. I can guess what a yarn he's
been spinning. He's a great hand at spinning them; he has a perfect
record-office in his head. He's such a realist, you know, that he can't
tell a lie, and prefers truthfulness to effect... except, of course,
in special cases when effect is more important than truth." (As he said
this he was still looking about him.) "So, you see clearly, maman, that
it's not for you to ask my forgiveness, and if there's any craziness
about this affair it's my fault, and it proves that, when all's said and
done, I really am mad.... I must keep up my character here...."

Then he tenderly embraced his mother.

"In any case the subject has been fully discussed and is done with,"
he added, and there was a rather dry and resolute note in his voice.
Varvara Petrovna understood that note, but her exaltation was not
damped, quite the contrary.

"I didn't expect you for another month, Nicolas!"

"I will explain everything to you, maman, of course, but now..."

And he went towards Praskovya Ivanovna.

But she scarcely turned her head towards him, though she had been
completely overwhelmed by his first appearance. Now she had fresh
anxieties to think of; at the moment the captain had stumbled upon
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch as he was going out, Liza had suddenly begun
laughing--at first quietly and intermittently, but her laughter grew
more and more violent, louder and more conspicuous. She flushed crimson,
in striking contrast with her gloomy expression just before.

While Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was talking to Varvara Petrovna, she had
twice beckoned to Mavriky Nikolaevitch as though she wanted to whisper
something to him; but as soon as the young man bent down to her, she
instantly burst into laughter; so that it seemed as though it was at
poor Mavriky Nikolaevitch that she was laughing. She evidently tried to
control herself, however, and put her handkerchief to her lips.
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch turned to greet her with a most innocent and
open-hearted air.

"Please excuse me," she responded, speaking quickly. "You... you've seen
Mavriky Nikolaevitch of course.... My goodness, how inexcusably tall you
are, Mavriky Nikolaevitch!"

And laughter again, Mavriky Nikolaevitch was tall, but by no means
inexcusably so.

"Have... you been here long?" she muttered, restraining herself again,
genuinely embarrassed though her eyes were shining.

"More than two hours," answered Nicolas, looking at her intently. I may
remark that he was exceptionally reserved and courteous, but that apart
from his courtesy his expression was utterly indifferent, even listless.

"And where are you going to stay?"

"Here."

Varvara Petrovna, too, was watching Liza, but she was suddenly struck by
an idea.

"Where have you been all this time, Nicolas, more than two hours?" she
said, going up to him. "The train comes in at ten o'clock."

"I first took Pyotr Stepanovitch to Kirillov's. I came across Pyotr
Stepanovitch at Matveyev (three stations away), and we travelled
together."

"I had been waiting at Matveyev since sunrise," put in Pyotr
Stepanovitch. "The last carriages of our train ran off the rails in the
night, and we nearly had our legs broken."

"Your legs broken!" cried Liza. "Maman, maman, you and I meant to go to
Matveyev last week, we should have broken our legs too!"

"Heaven have mercy on us!" cried Praskovya Ivanovna, crossing herself.

"Maman, maman, dear maman, you mustn't be frightened if I break both my
legs. It may so easily happen to me; you say yourself that I ride so
recklessly every day. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, will you go about with me
when I'm lame?" She began giggling again. "If it does happen I won't let
anyone take me about but you, you can reckon on that.... Well, suppose I
break only one leg. Come, be polite, say you'll think it a pleasure."

"A pleasure to be crippled?" said Mavriky Nikolaevitch, frowning
gravely.

"But then you'll lead me about, only you and no one else."

"Even then it'll be you leading me about, Lizaveta Nikolaevna,"
murmured Mavriky Nikolaevitch, even more gravely.

"Why, he's trying to make a joke!" cried Liza, almost in dismay.
"Mavriky Nikolaevitch, don't you ever dare take to that! But what an
egoist you are! I am certain that, to your credit, you're slandering
yourself. It will be quite the contrary; from morning till night you'll
assure me that I have become more charming for having lost my leg.
There's one insurmountable difficulty--you're so fearfully tall, and
when I've lost my leg I shall be so very tiny.. How will you be able to
take me on your arm; we shall look a strange couple!"

And she laughed hysterically. Her jests and insinuations were feeble,
but she was not capable of considering the effect she was producing.

"Hysterics!" Pyotr Stepanovitch whispered to me. "A glass of water, make
haste!"

He was right. A minute later every one was fussing about, water was
brought. Liza embraced her mother, kissed her warmly, wept on her
shoulder, then drawing back and looking her in the face she fell to
laughing again. The mother too began whimpering. Varvara Petrovna made
haste to carry them both off to her own rooms, going out by the same
door by which Darya Pavlovna had come to us. But they were not away
long, not more than four minutes.

I am trying to remember now every detail of these last moments of that
memorable morning. I remember that when we were left without the ladies
(except Darya Pavlovna, who had not moved from her seat), Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch made the round, greeting us all except Shatov, who still
sat in his corner, his head more bowed than ever. Stepan Trofimovitch
was beginning something very witty to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but the
latter turned away hurriedly to Darya Pavlovna. But before he reached
her, Pyotr Stepanovitch caught him and drew him away, almost violently,
towards the window, where he whispered something quickly to him,
apparently something very important to judge by the expression of
his face and the gestures that accompanied the whisper. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch listened inattentively and listlessly with his official
smile, and at last even impatiently, and seemed all the time on the
point of breaking away. He moved away from the window just as the ladies
came back. Varvara Petrovna made Liza sit down in the same seat as
before, declaring that she must wait and rest another ten minutes; and
that the fresh air would perhaps be too much for her nerves at once.
She was looking after Liza with great devotion, and sat down beside
her. Pyotr Stepanovitch, now disengaged, skipped up to them at once,
and broke into a rapid and lively flow of conversation. At that point
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at last went up to Darya Pavlovna with his
leisurely step. Dasha began stirring uneasily at his approach, and
jumped up quickly in evident embarrassment, flushing all over her face.

"I believe one may congratulate you... or is it too soon?" he brought
out with a peculiar line in his face.

Dasha made him some answer, but it was difficult to catch it.

"Forgive my indiscretion," he added, raising his voice, "but you know I
was expressly informed. Did you know about it?"

"Yes, I know that you were expressly informed."

"But I hope I have not done any harm by my congratulations," he laughed.
"And if Stepan Trofimovitch..."

"What, what's the congratulation about?" Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly
skipped up to them. "What are you being congratulated about, Darya
Pavlovna? Bah! Surely that's not it? Your blush proves I've guessed
right. And indeed, what else does one congratulate our charming and
virtuous young ladies on? And what congratulations make them blush most
readily? Well, accept mine too, then, if I've guessed right! And pay
up. Do you remember when we were in Switzerland you bet you'd never be
married.... Oh, yes, apropos of Switzerland--what am I thinking about?
Only fancy, that's half what I came about, and I was almost forgetting
it. Tell me," he turned quickly to Stepan Trofimovitch, "when are you
going to Switzerland?"

"I... to Switzerland?" Stepan Trofimovitch replied, wondering and
confused.

"What? Aren't you going? Why you're getting married, too, you wrote?"

_"Pierre!"_ cried Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Well, why Pierre?... You see, if that'll please you, I've flown here to
announce that I'm not at all against it, since you were set on having
my opinion as quickly as possible; and if, indeed," he pattered on, "you
want to 'be saved,' as you wrote, beseeching my help in the same letter,
I am at your service again. Is it true that he is going to be married,
Varvara Petrovna?" He turned quickly to her. "I hope I'm not being
indiscreet; he writes himself that the whole town knows it and every
one's congratulating him, so that, to avoid it he only goes out at
night. I've got his letters in my pocket. But would you believe it,
Varvara Petrovna, I can't make head or tail of it? Just tell me one
thing, Stepan Trofimovitch, are you to be congratulated or are you to
be 'saved'?  You wouldn't believe it; in one line he's despairing and in
the next he's most joyful. To begin with he begs my forgiveness; well,
of course, that's their way... though it must be said; fancy, the man's
only seen me twice in his life and then by accident. And suddenly now,
when he's going to be married for the third time, he imagines that
this is a breach of some sort of parental duty to me, and entreats me a
thousand miles away not to be angry and to allow him to. Please don't
be hurt, Stepan Trofimovitch. It's characteristic of your generation,
I take a broad view of it, and don't blame you. And let's admit it does
you honour and all the rest. But the point is again that I don't see the
point of it. There's something about some sort of 'sins in Switzerland.'
'I'm getting married,' he says, for my sins or on account of the 'sins'
of another,' or whatever it is--'sins' anyway. 'The girl,' says he, 'is
a pearl and a diamond,' and, well, of course, he's 'unworthy of her';
it's their way of talking; but on account of some sins or circumstances
'he is obliged to lead her to the altar, and go to Switzerland, and
therefore abandon everything and fly to save me.' Do you understand
anything of all that? However... however, I notice from the expression
of your faces"--(he turned about with the letter in his hand looking
with an innocent smile into the faces of the company)--"that, as usual,
I seem to have put my foot in it through my stupid way of being open,
or, as Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch says, 'being in a hurry.' I thought, of
course, that we were all friends here, that is, your friends, Stepan
Trofimovitch, your friends. I am really a stranger, and I see... and I
see that you all know something, and that just that something I don't
know." He still went on looking about him.

"So Stepan Trofimovitch wrote to you that he was getting married for
the 'sins of another committed in Switzerland,' and that you were to
fly here 'to save him,' in those very words?" said Varvara Petrovna,
addressing him suddenly. Her face was yellow and distorted, and her lips
were twitching.

"Well, you see, if there's anything I've not understood," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, as though in alarm, talking more quickly than ever, "it's
his fault, of course, for writing like that. Here's the letter. You
know, Varvara Petrovna, his letters are endless and incessant, and,
you know, for the last two or three months there has been letter upon
letter, till, I must own, at last I sometimes didn't read them through.
Forgive me, Stepan Trofimovitch, for my foolish confession, but you must
admit, please, that, though you addressed them to me, you wrote them
more for posterity, so that you really can't mind.... Come, come, don't
be offended; we're friends, anyway. But this letter, Varvara Petrovna,
this letter, I did read through. These 'sins'--these 'sins of
another'--are probably some little sins of our own, and I don't mind
betting very innocent ones, though they have suddenly made us take a
fancy to work up a terrible story, with a glamour of the heroic about
it; and it's just for the sake of that glamour we've got it up. You
see there's something a little lame about our accounts--it must be
confessed, in the end. We've a great weakness for cards, you know....
But this is unnecessary, quite unnecessary, I'm sorry, I chatter too
much. But upon my word, Varvara Petrovna, he gave me a fright, and I
really was half prepared to save him. He really made me feel ashamed.
Did he expect me to hold a knife to his throat, or what? Am I such a
merciless creditor? He writes something here of a dowry.... But are you
really going to get married, Stepan Trofimovitch? That would be just
like you, to say a lot for the sake of talking. Ach, Varvara Petrovna,
I'm sure you must be blaming me now, and just for my way of talking
too...."

"On the contrary, on the contrary, I see that you are driven out of
all patience, and, no doubt you have had good reason," Varvara Petrovna
answered spitefully. She had listened with spiteful enjoyment to all the
"candid outbursts" of Pyotr Stepanovitch, who was obviously playing
a part (what part I did not know then, but it was unmistakable, and
over-acted indeed).

"On the contrary," she went on, "I'm only too grateful to you for
speaking; but for you I might not have known of it. My eyes are opened
for the first time for twenty years. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, you
said just now that you had been expressly informed; surely Stepan
Trofimovitch hasn't written to you in the same style?"

"I did get a very harmless and... and... very generous letter from
him...."

"You hesitate, you pick out your words. That's enough! Stepan
Trofimovitch, I request a great favour from you." She suddenly turned to
him with flashing eyes. "Kindly leave us at once, and never set foot in
my house again."

I must beg the reader to remember her recent "exaltation," which had not
yet passed. It's true that Stepan Trofimovitch was terribly to blame!
But what was a complete surprise to me then was the wonderful dignity of
his bearing under his son's "accusation," which he had never thought of
interrupting, and before Varvara Petrovna's "denunciation." How did he
come by such spirit? I only found out one thing, that he had certainly
been deeply wounded at his first meeting with Petrusha, by the way he
had embraced him. It was a deep and genuine grief; at least in his eyes
and to his heart. He had another grief at the same time, that is the
poignant consciousness of having acted contemptibly. He admitted this
to me afterwards with perfect openness. And you know real genuine sorrow
will sometimes make even a phenomenally frivolous, unstable man solid
and stoical; for a short time at any rate; what's more, even fools are
by genuine sorrow turned into wise men, also only for a short time of
course; it is characteristic of sorrow. And if so, what might not
happen with a man like Stepan Trofimovitch? It worked a complete
transformation--though also only for a time, of course.

He bowed with dignity to Varvara Petrovna without uttering a word (there
was nothing else left for him to do, indeed). He was on the point of
going out without a word, but could not refrain from approaching Darya
Pavlovna. She seemed to foresee that he would do so, for she began
speaking of her own accord herself, in utter dismay, as though in haste
