trembling tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the
officer.

"I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know
your name."

He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.

Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene,
the police arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple
of minutes. Some of the spectators had risen from their places, and
departed altogether; some merely exchanged their seats for others a
little further off; some were delighted with the occurrence, and talked
and laughed over it for a long time.

In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began
to play again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had
he thought of looking round to the left after he had been pushed so
unceremoniously into the chair, he would have observed Aglaya standing
some twenty yards away. She had stayed to watch the scandalous scene in
spite of her mother's and sisters' anxious cries to her to come away.

Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with
them.

Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation
that it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a
couple of minutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly
remarked, in her usual calm, indifferent voice:

"I wanted to see how the farce would end."

III.

The occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with
something like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the
girls were nearly running all the way home.

In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode,
that, in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to
feel more or less decided on certain points which, up to now, had been
in a cloudy condition.

However, one and all of the party realized that something important
had happened, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had
hitherto been enveloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to
come forth a little from the mists. In spite of Prince S.'s assurances
and explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch's real character and position were
at last coming to light. He was publicly convicted of intimacy with
"that creature." So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two elder
daughters.

But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to
be solved was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their
mother's exaggerated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been
unwilling to worry her at first with questions.

Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably
knew more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put
together.

Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody. Mrs.
Epanchin did not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem
to observe the fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, "who
was the uncle they were talking about, and what was it that had happened
in Petersburg?" But he had merely muttered something disconnected about
"making inquiries," and that "of course it was all nonsense." "Oh, of
course," replied Adelaida, and asked no more questions. Aglaya, too, was
very quiet; and the only remark she made on the way home was that they
were "walking much too fast to be pleasant."

Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them. Noticing
his anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked
back no more. At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin
came out and met them; he had only just arrived from town.

His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha
stalked past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.

He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that
there was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences
of unusual perturbation of mind.

He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door,
engaged in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of
both of them, when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin,
it was evident that they had been discussing very disturbing news.

Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on
the verandah when he arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat
waiting, though he knew not what he expected. It never struck him that
he had better go away, with all this disturbance in the house. He seemed
to have forgotten all the world, and to be ready to sit on where he was
for years on end. From upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation
every now and then.

He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite
dark.

Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm,
though a little pale.

Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there,
alone in the corner, she smiled, and approached him:

"What are you doing there?" she asked.

The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya
immediately sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.

She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window,
as though thinking of something else, and then again at him.

"Perhaps she wants to laugh at me," thought the prince, "but no; for if
she did she certainly would do so."

"Would you like some tea? I'll order some," she said, after a minute or
two of silence.

"N-no thanks, I don't know--"

"Don't know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here--if someone
were to challenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask you
this--some time ago--"

"Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!"

"But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?"

"I dare say I should be--much alarmed!"

"Seriously? Then are you a coward?"

"N-no!--I don't think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and runs away;
the man who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a coward,"
said the prince with a smile, after a moment's thought.

"And you wouldn't run away?"

"No--I don't think I should run away," replied the prince, laughing
outright at last at Aglaya's questions.

"Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for anything,"
said Aglaya, in a slightly pained voice. "However, I see you are
laughing at me and twisting your face up as usual in order to make
yourself look more interesting. Now tell me, they generally shoot at
twenty paces, don't they? At ten, sometimes? I suppose if at ten they
must be either wounded or killed, mustn't they?"

"I don't think they often kill each other at duels."

"They killed Pushkin that way."

"That may have been an accident."

"Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed."

"The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never
have aimed at that part of him--people never do; he would have aimed at
his chest or head; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I
have been told this by competent authorities."

"Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at
the middle of the body. So you see they don't aim at the chest or head;
they aim lower on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards,
and he said it was perfectly true."

"That is probably when they fire from a long distance."

"Can you shoot at all?"

"No, I have never shot in my life."

"Can't you even load a pistol?"

"No! That is, I understand how it's done, of course, but I have never
done it."

"Then, you don't know how, for it is a matter that needs practice. Now
listen and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say
it mustn't be at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is--you must
ask for _pistol_ powder, not the stuff they load cannons with. They say
one makes the bullets oneself, somehow or other. Have you got a pistol?"

"No--and I don't want one," said the prince, laughing.

"Oh, what _nonsense!_ You must buy one. French or English are the best,
they say. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two,
and pour it into the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of
felt (it _must_ be felt, for some reason or other); you can easily get
a bit off some old mattress, or off a door; it's used to keep the cold
out. Well, when you have pushed the felt down, put the bullet in; do you
hear now? The bullet last and the powder first, not the other way, or
the pistol won't shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you to buy
a pistol and practise every day, and you must learn to hit a mark for
_certain_; will you?"

The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.

Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him
considerably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something,
that there was something he wanted to find out far more important than
how to load a pistol; but his thoughts had all scattered, and he was
only aware that she was sitting by him, and talking to him, and that
he was looking at her; as to what she happened to be saying to him, that
did not matter in the least.

The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs. He was
on his way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and of
preoccupation and worry also.

"Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it's you, is it? Where are you off to now?" he
asked, oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the least
sign of moving. "Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to
you."

"_Au revoir_, then!" said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the prince.

It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but
a minute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he
suddenly flushed up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.

It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In
spite of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk
to someone upon some important subject. Meanwhile he talked incessantly
but disconnectedly to the prince, and continually brought in the name of
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what
the general was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was
desirous of drawing some information out of him, or indeed of asking him
some question outright; but that he could not make up his mind to come
to the point.

Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend
to a word the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped
before him with some excited question, he was obliged to confess,
ignominiously, that he did not know in the least what he had been
talking about.

The general shrugged his shoulders.

"How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late," said
he. "I was telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha
Prokofievna's ideas and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and
moans and says that we have been 'shamed and disgraced.' How? Why? When?
By whom? I confess that I am very much to blame myself; I do not conceal
the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous behaviour of this woman, must
really be kept within limits, by the police if necessary, and I am just
on my way now to talk the question over and make some arrangements.
It can all be managed quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the
slightest fuss or scandal. I foresee that the future is pregnant with
events, and that there is much that needs explanation. There is intrigue
in the wind; but if on one side nothing is known, on the other side
nothing will be explained. If I have heard nothing about it, nor have
_you_, nor _he_, nor _she_--who _has_ heard about it, I should like to
know? How _can_ all this be explained except by the fact that half of
it is mirage or moonshine, or some hallucination of that sort?"

"_She_ is insane," muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting all that had
passed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.

"I too had that idea, and I slept in peace. But now I see that their
opinion is more correct. I do not believe in the theory of madness! The
woman has no common sense; but she is not only not insane, she is artful
to a degree. Her outburst of this evening about Evgenie's uncle proves
that conclusively. It was _villainous_, simply jesuitical, and it was all
for some special purpose."

"What about Evgenie's uncle?"

"My goodness, Lef Nicolaievitch, why, you can't have heard a single
word I said! Look at me, I'm still trembling all over with the dreadful
shock! It is that that kept me in town so late. Evgenie Pavlovitch's
uncle--"

"Well?" cried the prince.

"Shot himself this morning, at seven o'clock. A respected, eminent old
man of seventy; and exactly point for point as she described it; a sum
of money, a considerable sum of government money, missing!"

"Why, how could she--"

"What, know of it? Ha, ha, ha! Why, there was a whole crowd round her
the moment she appeared on the scenes here. You know what sort of people
surround her nowadays, and solicit the honour of her 'acquaintance.'
Of course she might easily have heard the news from someone coming from
town. All Petersburg, if not all Pavlofsk, knows it by now. Look at the
slyness of her observation about Evgenie's uniform! I mean, her remark
that he had retired just in time! There's a venomous hint for you,
if you like! No, no! there's no insanity there! Of course I refuse
to believe that Evgenie Pavlovitch could have known beforehand of the
catastrophe; that is, that at such and such a day at seven o'clock, and
all that; but he might well have had a presentiment of the truth. And
I--all of us--Prince S. and everybody, believed that he was to inherit
a large fortune from this uncle. It's dreadful, horrible! Mind, I don't
suspect Evgenie of anything, be quite clear on that point; but the
thing is a little suspicious, nevertheless. Prince S. can't get over it.
Altogether it is a very extraordinary combination of circumstances."

"What suspicion attaches to Evgenie Pavlovitch?"

"Oh, none at all! He has behaved very well indeed. I didn't mean to
drop any sort of hint. His own fortune is intact, I believe. Lizabetha
Prokofievna, of course, refuses to listen to anything. That's the worst
of it all, these family catastrophes or quarrels, or whatever you like
to call them. You know, prince, you are a friend of the family, so I
don't mind telling you; it now appears that Evgenie Pavlovitch proposed
to Aglaya a month ago, and was refused."

"Impossible!" cried the prince.

"Why? Do you know anything about it? Look here," continued the general,
more agitated than ever, and trembling with excitement, "maybe I have
been letting the cat out of the bag too freely with you, if so, it
is because you are--that sort of man, you know! Perhaps you have some
special information?"

"I know nothing about Evgenie Pavlovitch!" said the prince.

"Nor do I! They always try to bury me underground when there's anything
going on; they don't seem to reflect that it is unpleasant to a man
to be treated so! I won't stand it! We have just had a terrible
scene!--mind, I speak to you as I would to my own son! Aglaya laughs at
her mother. Her sisters guessed about Evgenie having proposed and been
rejected, and told Lizabetha.

"I tell you, my dear fellow, Aglaya is such an extraordinary, such a
self-willed, fantastical little creature, you wouldn't believe it! Every
high quality, every brilliant trait of heart and mind, are to be
found in her, and, with it all, so much caprice and mockery, such wild
fancies--indeed, a little devil! She has just been laughing at her
mother to her very face, and at her sisters, and at Prince S., and
everybody--and of course she always laughs at me! You know I love the
child--I love her even when she laughs at me, and I believe the wild
little creature has a special fondness for me for that very reason. She
is fonder of me than any of the others. I dare swear she has had a
good laugh at _you_ before now! You were having a quiet talk just now, I
observed, after all the thunder and lightning upstairs. She was sitting
with you just as though there had been no row at all."

The prince blushed painfully in the darkness, and closed his right hand
tightly, but he said nothing.

"My dear good Prince Lef Nicolaievitch," began the general again,
suddenly, "both I and Lizabetha Prokofievna--(who has begun to respect
you once more, and me through you, goodness knows why!)--we both love
you very sincerely, and esteem you, in spite of any appearances to the
contrary. But you'll admit what a riddle it must have been for us when
that calm, cold, little spitfire, Aglaya--(for she stood up to her
mother and answered her questions with inexpressible contempt, and mine
still more so, because, like a fool, I thought it my duty to assert
myself as head of the family)--when Aglaya stood up of a sudden and
informed us that 'that madwoman' (strangely enough, she used exactly the
same expression as you did) 'has taken it into her head to marry me
to Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, and therefore is doing her best to choke
Evgenie Pavlovitch off, and rid the house of him.' That's what she said.
She would not give the slightest explanation; she burst out laughing,
banged the door, and went away. We all stood there with our mouths open.
Well, I was told afterwards of your little passage with Aglaya this
afternoon, and--and--dear prince--you are a good, sensible fellow, don't
be angry if I speak out--she is laughing at you, my boy! She is enjoying
herself like a child, at your expense, and therefore, since she is a
child, don't be angry with her, and don't think anything of it. I assure
you, she is simply making a fool of you, just as she does with one and
all of us out of pure lack of something better to do. Well--good-bye!
You know our feelings, don't you--our sincere feelings for yourself?
They are unalterable, you know, dear boy, under all circumstances,
but--Well, here we part; I must go down to the right. Rarely have I sat
so uncomfortably in my saddle, as they say, as I now sit. And people
talk of the charms of a country holiday!"

Left to himself at the cross-roads, the prince glanced around him,
quickly crossed the road towards the lighted window of a neighbouring
house, and unfolded a tiny scrap of paper which he had held clasped in
his right hand during the whole of his conversation with the general.

He read the note in the uncertain rays that fell from the window. It was
as follows:

"Tomorrow morning, I shall be at the green bench in the park at seven,
and shall wait there for you. I have made up my mind to speak to you
about a most important matter which closely concerns yourself.

"P.S.--I trust that you will not show this note to anyone. Though I
am ashamed of giving you such instructions, I feel that I must do so,
considering what you are. I therefore write the words, and blush for
your simple character.

"P.P.S.--It is the same green bench that I showed you before. There!
aren't you ashamed of yourself? I felt that it was necessary to repeat
even that information."

The note was written and folded anyhow, evidently in a great hurry, and
probably just before Aglaya had come down to the verandah.

In inexpressible agitation, amounting almost to fear, the prince slipped
quickly away from the window, away from the light, like a frightened
thief, but as he did so he collided violently with some gentleman who
seemed to spring from the earth at his feet.

"I was watching for you, prince," said the individual.

"Is that you, Keller?" said the prince, in surprise.

"Yes, I've been looking for you. I waited for you at the Epanchins'
house, but of course I could not come in. I dogged you from behind
as you walked along with the general. Well, prince, here is Keller,
absolutely at your service--command him!--ready to sacrifice
himself--even to die in case of need."

"But-why?"

"Oh, why?--Of course you'll be challenged! That was young Lieutenant
Moloftsoff. I know him, or rather of him; he won't pass an insult. He
will take no notice of Rogojin and myself, and, therefore, you are the
only one left to account for. You'll have to pay the piper, prince. He
has been asking about you, and undoubtedly his friend will call on you
tomorrow--perhaps he is at your house already. If you would do me the
honour to have me for a second, prince, I should be happy. That's why I
have been looking for you now."

"Duel! You've come to talk about a duel, too!" The prince burst
out laughing, to the great astonishment of Keller. He laughed
unrestrainedly, and Keller, who had been on pins and needles, and in a
fever of excitement to offer himself as "second," was very near being
offended.

"You caught him by the arms, you know, prince. No man of proper pride
can stand that sort of treatment in public."

"Yes, and he gave me a fearful dig in the chest," cried the prince,
still laughing. "What are we to fight about? I shall beg his pardon,
that's all. But if we must fight--we'll fight! Let him have a shot at
me, by all means; I should rather like it. Ha, ha, ha! I know how to
load a pistol now; do you know how to load a pistol, Keller? First, you
have to buy the powder, you know; it mustn't be wet, and it mustn't be
that coarse stuff that they load cannons with--it must be pistol powder.
Then you pour the powder in, and get hold of a bit of felt from some
door, and then shove the bullet in. But don't shove the bullet in before
the powder, because the thing wouldn't go off--do you hear, Keller, the
thing wouldn't go off! Ha, ha, ha! Isn't that a grand reason, Keller,
my friend, eh? Do you know, my dear fellow, I really must kiss you, and
embrace you, this very moment. Ha, ha! How was it you so suddenly popped
up in front of me as you did? Come to my house as soon as you can, and
we'll have some champagne. We'll all get drunk! Do you know I have a
dozen of champagne in Lebedeff's cellar? Lebedeff sold them to me the
day after I arrived. I took the lot. We'll invite everybody! Are you
going to do any sleeping tonight?"

"As much as usual, prince--why?"

"Pleasant dreams then--ha, ha!"

The prince crossed the road, and disappeared into the park, leaving the
astonished Keller in a state of ludicrous wonder. He had never before
seen the prince in such a strange condition of mind, and could not have
imagined the possibility of it.

"Fever, probably," he said to himself, "for the man is all nerves, and
this business has been a little too much for him. He is not _afraid_,
that's clear; that sort never funks! H'm! champagne! That was an
interesting item of news, at all events!--Twelve bottles! Dear me,
that's a very respectable little stock indeed! I bet anything Lebedeff
lent somebody money on deposit of this dozen of champagne. Hum! he's a
nice fellow, is this prince! I like this sort of man. Well, I needn't be
wasting time here, and if it's a case of champagne, why--there's no time
like the present!"

That the prince was almost in a fever was no more than the truth. He
wandered about the park for a long while, and at last came to himself in
a lonely avenue. He was vaguely conscious that he had already paced this
particular walk--from that large, dark tree to the bench at the other
end--about a hundred yards altogether--at least thirty times backwards
and forwards.

As to recollecting what he had been thinking of all that time, he could
not. He caught himself, however, indulging in one thought which made him
roar with laughter, though there was nothing really to laugh at in it;
but he felt that he must laugh, and go on laughing.

It struck him that the idea of the duel might not have occurred to
Keller alone, but that his lesson in the art of pistol-loading might
have been not altogether accidental! "Pooh! nonsense!" he said to
himself, struck by another thought, of a sudden. "Why, she was immensely
surprised to find me there on the verandah, and laughed and talked about
_tea!_ And yet she had this little note in her hand, therefore she must
have known that I was sitting there. So why was she surprised? Ha, ha,
ha!"

He pulled the note out and kissed it; then paused and reflected. "How
strange it all is! how strange!" he muttered, melancholy enough now. In
moments of great joy, he invariably felt a sensation of melancholy come
over him--he could not tell why.

He looked intently around him, and wondered why he had come here; he was
very tired, so he approached the bench and sat down on it. Around him
was profound silence; the music in the Vauxhall was over. The park
seemed quite empty, though it was not, in reality, later than half-past
eleven. It was a quiet, warm, clear night--a real Petersburg night of
early June; but in the dense avenue, where he was sitting, it was almost
pitch dark.

If anyone had come up at this moment and told him that he was in love,
passionately in love, he would have rejected the idea with astonishment,
and, perhaps, with irritation. And if anyone had added that Aglaya's
note was a love-letter, and that it contained an appointment to a
lover's rendezvous, he would have blushed with shame for the speaker,
and, probably, have challenged him to a duel.

All this would have been perfectly sincere on his part. He had never
for a moment entertained the idea of the possibility of this girl loving
him, or even of such a thing as himself falling in love with her. The
possibility of being loved himself, "a man like me," as he put it, he
ranked among ridiculous suppositions. It appeared to him that it was
simply a joke on Aglaya's part, if there really were anything in it at
all; but that seemed to him quite natural. His preoccupation was caused
by something different.

As to the few words which the general had let slip about Aglaya laughing
at everybody, and at himself most of all--he entirely believed them. He
did not feel the slightest sensation of offence; on the contrary, he was
quite certain that it was as it should be.

His whole thoughts were now as to next morning early; he would see
her; he would sit by her on that little green bench, and listen to how
pistols were loaded, and look at her. He wanted nothing more.

The question as to what she might have to say of special interest to
himself occurred to him once or twice. He did not doubt, for a moment,
that she really had some such subject of conversation in store, but so
very little interested in the matter was he that it did not strike him
to wonder what it could be. The crunch of gravel on the path suddenly
caused him to raise his head.

A man, whose face it was difficult to see in the gloom, approached the
bench, and sat down beside him. The prince peered into his face, and
recognized the livid features of Rogojin.

"I knew you'd be wandering about somewhere here. I didn't have to look
for you very long," muttered the latter between his teeth.

It was the first time they had met since the encounter on the staircase
at the hotel.

Painfully surprised as he was at this sudden apparition of Rogojin,
the prince, for some little while, was unable to collect his thoughts.
Rogojin, evidently, saw and understood the impression he had made; and
though he seemed more or less confused at first, yet he began talking
with what looked like assumed ease and freedom. However, the prince soon
changed his mind on this score, and thought that there was not only no
affectation of indifference, but that Rogojin was not even particularly
agitated. If there were a little apparent awkwardness, it was only in
his words and gestures. The man could not change his heart.

"How did you--find me here?" asked the prince for the sake of saying
something.

"Keller told me (I found him at your place) that you were in the park.
'Of course he is!' I thought."

"Why so?" asked the prince uneasily.

Rogojin smiled, but did not explain.

"I received your letter, Lef Nicolaievitch--what's the good of all
that?--It's no use, you know. I've come to you from _her_,--she bade me
tell you that she must see you, she has something to say to you. She
told me to find you today."

"I'll come tomorrow. Now I'm going home--are you coming to my house?"

"Why should I? I've given you the message.--Goodbye!"

"Won't you come?" asked the prince in a gentle voice.

"What an extraordinary man you are! I wonder at you!" Rogojin laughed
sarcastically.

"Why do you hate me so?" asked the prince, sadly. "You know yourself
that all you suspected is quite unfounded. I felt you were still angry
with me, though. Do you know why? Because you tried to kill me--that's
why you can't shake off your wrath against me. I tell you that I only
remember the Parfen Rogojin with whom I exchanged crosses, and vowed
brotherhood. I wrote you this in yesterday's letter, in order that you
might forget all that madness on your part, and that you might not feel
called to talk about it when we met. Why do you avoid me? Why do you
hold your hand back from me? I tell you again, I consider all that has
passed a delirium, an insane dream. I can understand all you did,
and all you felt that day, as if it were myself. What you were then
imagining was not the case, and could never be the case. Why, then,
should there be anger between us?"

"You don't know what anger is!" laughed Rogojin, in reply to the
prince's heated words.

He had moved a pace or two away, and was hiding his hands behind him.

"No, it is impossible for me to come to your house again," he added
slowly.

"Why? Do you hate me so much as all that?"

"I don't love you, Lef Nicolaievitch, and, therefore, what would be
the use of my coming to see you? You are just like a child--you want a
plaything, and it must be taken out and given you--and then you don't
know how to work it. You are simply repeating all you said in your
letter, and what's the use? Of course I believe every word you say, and
I know perfectly well that you neither did or ever can deceive me in
any way, and yet, I don't love you. You write that you've forgotten
everything, and only remember your brother Parfen, with whom you
exchanged crosses, and that you don't remember anything about the
Rogojin who aimed a knife at your throat. What do you know about my
feelings, eh?" (Rogojin laughed disagreeably.) "Here you are holding out
your brotherly forgiveness to me for a thing that I have perhaps never
repented of in the slightest degree. I did not think of it again all
that evening; all my thoughts were centred on something else--"

"Not think of it again? Of course you didn't!" cried the prince. "And I
dare swear that you came straight away down here to Pavlofsk to listen
to the music and dog her about in the crowd, and stare at her, just as
you did today. There's nothing surprising in that! If you hadn't been in
that condition of mind that you could think of nothing but one subject,
you would, probably, never have raised your knife against me. I had a
presentiment of what you would do, that day, ever since I saw you first
in the morning. Do you know yourself what you looked like? I knew
you would try to murder me even at the very moment when we exchanged
crosses. What did you take me to your mother for? Did you think to stay
your hand by doing so? Perhaps you did not put your thoughts into words,
but you and I were thinking the same thing, or feeling the same thing
looming over us, at the same moment. What should you think of me now if
you had not raised your knife to me--the knife which God averted from my
throat? I would have been guilty of suspecting you all the same--and you
would have intended the murder all the same; therefore we should have
been mutually guilty in any case. Come, don't frown; you needn't laugh
at me, either. You say you haven't 'repented.' Repented! You probably
couldn't, if you were to try; you dislike me too much for that. Why,
if I were an angel of light, and as innocent before you as a babe, you
would still loathe me if you believed that _she_ loved me, instead of
loving yourself. That's jealousy--that is the real jealousy.

"But do you know what I have been thinking out during this last week,
Parfen? I'll tell you. What if she loves you now better than anyone? And
what if she torments you _because_ she loves you, and in proportion to her
love for you, so she torments you the more? She won't tell you this, of
course; you must have eyes to see. Why do you suppose she consents to
marry you? She must have a reason, and that reason she will tell you
some day. Some women desire the kind of love you give her, and she is
probably one of these. Your love and your wild nature impress her. Do
you know that a woman is capable of driving a man crazy almost, with
her cruelties and mockeries, and feels not one single pang of regret,
because she looks at him and says to herself, 'There! I'll torment this
man nearly into his grave, and then, oh! how I'll compensate him for it
all with my love!'"

Rogojin listened to the end, and then burst out laughing:

"Why, prince, I declare you must have had a taste of this sort of thing
yourself--haven't you? I have heard tell of something of the kind, you
know; is it true?"

"What? What can you have heard?" said the prince, stammering.

Rogojin continued to laugh loudly. He had listened to the prince's
speech with curiosity and some satisfaction. The speaker's impulsive
warmth had surprised and even comforted him.

"Why, I've not only heard of it; I see it for myself," he said. "When
have you ever spoken like that before? It wasn't like yourself, prince.
Why, if I hadn't heard this report about you, I should never have come
all this way into the park--at midnight, too!"

"I don't understand you in the least, Parfen."

"Oh, _she_ told me all about it long ago, and tonight I saw for myself.
I saw you at the music, you know, and whom you were sitting with. She
swore to me yesterday, and again today, that you are madly in love with
Aglaya Ivanovna. But that's all the same to me, prince, and it's not my
affair at all; for if you have ceased to love _her_, _she_ has not ceased
to love _you_. You know, of course, that she wants to marry you to that
girl? She's sworn to it! Ha, ha! She says to me, 'Until then I won't marry
you. When they go to church, we'll go too--and not before.' What on earth
does she mean by it? I don't know, and I never did. Either she loves you
without limits or--yet, if she loves you, why does she wish to marry
you to another girl? She says, 'I want to see him happy,' which is to
say--she loves you."

"I wrote, and I say to you once more, that she is not in her right
mind," said the prince, who had listened with anguish to what Rogojin
said.

"Goodness knows--you may be wrong there! At all events, she named the
day this evening, as we left the gardens. 'In three weeks,' says she,
'and perhaps sooner, we shall be married.' She swore to it, took off her
cross and kissed it. So it all depends upon you now, prince, You see!
Ha, ha!"

"That's all madness. What you say about me, Parfen, never can and never
will be. Tomorrow, I shall come and see you--"

"How can she be mad," Rogojin interrupted, "when she is sane enough for
other people and only mad for you? How can she write letters to _her_, if
she's mad? If she were insane they would observe it in her letters."

"What letters?" said the prince, alarmed.

"She writes to _her_--and the girl reads the letters. Haven't you
heard?--You are sure to hear; she's sure to show you the letters
herself."

"I won't believe this!" cried the prince.

"Why, prince, you've only gone a few steps along this road, I perceive.
You are evidently a mere beginner. Wait a bit! Before long, you'll have
your own detectives, you'll watch day and night, and you'll know every
little thing that goes on there--that is, if--"

"Drop that subject, Rogojin, and never mention it again. And listen:
as I have sat here, and talked, and listened, it has suddenly struck me
that tomorrow is my birthday. It must be about twelve o'clock, now; come
home with me--do, and we'll see the day in! We'll have some wine, and
you shall wish me--I don't know what--but you, especially you, must
wish me a good wish, and I shall wish you full happiness in return.
Otherwise, hand me my cross back again. You didn't return it to me next
day. Haven't you got it on now?"

"Yes, I have," said Rogojin.

"Come along, then. I don't wish to meet my new year without you--my new
life, I should say, for a new life is beginning for me. Did you know,
Parfen, that a new life had begun for me?"

"I see for myself that it is so--and I shall tell _her_. But you are not
quite yourself, Lef Nicolaievitch."

IV.

The prince observed with great surprise, as he approached his villa,
accompanied by Rogojin, that a large number of people were assembled on
his verandah, which was brilliantly lighted up. The company seemed merry
and were noisily laughing and talking--even quarrelling, to judge from
the sounds. At all events they were clearly enjoying themselves, and
the prince observed further on closer investigation--that all had been
drinking champagne. To judge from the lively condition of some of the
party, it was to be supposed that a considerable quantity of champagne
had been consumed already.

All the guests were known to the prince; but the curious part of the
matter was that they had all arrived on the same evening, as though with
one accord, although he had only himself recollected the fact that it
was his birthday a few moments since.

"You must have told somebody you were going to trot out the champagne,
and that's why they are all come!" muttered Rogojin, as the two entered
the verandah. "We know all about that! You've only to whistle and they
come up in shoals!" he continued, almost angrily. He was doubtless
thinking of his own late experiences with his boon companions.

All surrounded the prince with exclamations of welcome, and, on hearing
that it was his birthday, with cries of congratulation and delight; many
of them were very noisy.

The presence of certain of those in the room surprised the prince
vastly, but the guest whose advent filled him with the greatest
wonder--almost amounting to alarm--was Evgenie Pavlovitch. The prince
could not believe his eyes when he beheld the latter, and could not help
thinking that something was wrong.

Lebedeff ran up promptly to explain the arrival of all these gentlemen.
He was himself somewhat intoxicated, but the prince gathered from his
long-winded periods that the party had assembled quite naturally, and
accidentally.

First of all Hippolyte had arrived, early in the evening, and feeling
decidedly better, had determined to await the prince on the verandah.
There Lebedeff had joined him, and his household had followed--that is,
his daughters and General Ivolgin. Burdovsky had brought Hippolyte, and
stayed on with him. Gania and Ptitsin had dropped in accidentally later
on; then came Keller, and he and Colia insisted on having champagne.
Evgenie Pavlovitch had only dropped in half an hour or so ago. Lebedeff
had served the champagne readily.

"My own though, prince, my own, mind," he said, "and there'll be some
supper later on; my daughter is getting it ready now. Come and sit down,
prince, we are all waiting for you, we want you with us. Fancy what we
have been discussing! You know the question, 'to be or not to be,'--out
of Hamlet! A contemporary theme! Quite up-to-date! Mr. Hippolyte has
been eloquent to a degree. He won't go to bed, but he has only drunk a
little champagne, and that can't do him any harm. Come along, prince,
and settle the question. Everyone is waiting for you, sighing for the
light of your luminous intelligence..."

The prince noticed the sweet, welcoming look on Vera Lebedeff's face, as
she made her way towards him through the crowd. He held out his hand to
her. She took it, blushing with delight, and wished him "a happy life
from that day forward." Then she ran off to the kitchen, where her
presence was necessary to help in the preparations for supper. Before
the prince's arrival she had spent some time on the terrace, listening
eagerly to the conversation, though the visitors, mostly under the
influence of wine, were discussing abstract subjects far beyond her
comprehension. In the next room her younger sister lay on a wooden
chest, sound asleep, with her mouth wide open; but the boy, Lebedeff's
son, had taken up his position close beside Colia and Hippolyte, his
face lit up with interest in the conversation of his father and the
rest, to which he would willingly have listened for ten hours at a
stretch.

"I have waited for you on purpose, and am very glad to see you arrive so
happy," said Hippolyte, when the prince came forward to press his hand,
immediately after greeting Vera.

"And how do you know that I am 'so happy'?

"I can see it by your face! Say 'how do you do' to the others, and
come and sit down here, quick--I've been waiting for you!" he added,
accentuating the fact that he had waited. On the prince's asking, "Will
it not be injurious to you to sit out so late?" he replied that he could
not believe that he had thought himself dying three days or so ago, for
he never had felt better than this evening.

Burdovsky next jumped up and explained that he had come in by accident,
having escorted Hippolyte from town. He murmured that he was glad he
had "written nonsense" in his letter, and then pressed the prince's hand
warmly and sat down again.

The prince approached Evgenie Pavlovitch last of all. The latter
immediately took his arm.

"I have a couple of words to say to you," he began, "and those on a very
important matter; let's go aside for a minute or two."

"Just a couple of words!" whispered another voice in the prince's other
ear, and another hand took his other arm. Muishkin turned, and to his
great surprise observed a red, flushed face and a droll-looking figure
which he recognized at once as that of Ferdishenko. Goodness knows where
he had turned up from!

"Do you remember Ferdishenko?" he asked.

"Where have you dropped from?" cried the prince.

"He is sorry for his sins now, prince," cried Keller. "He did not
want to let you know he was here; he was hidden over there in the
corner,--but he repents now, he feels his guilt."

"Why, what has he done?"

"I met him outside and brought him in--he's a gentleman who doesn't
often allow his friends to see him, of late--but he's sorry now."

"Delighted, I'm sure!--I'll come back directly, gentlemen,--sit down
there with the others, please,--excuse me one moment," said the host,
getting away with difficulty in order to follow Evgenie.

"You are very gay here," began the latter, "and I have had quite
a pleasant half-hour while I waited for you. Now then, my dear Lef
Nicolaievitch, this is what's the matter. I've arranged it all with
Moloftsoff, and have just come in to relieve your mind on that score.
You need be under no apprehensions. He was very sensible, as he should
be, of course, for I think he was entirely to blame himself."

"What Moloftsoff?"

"The young fellow whose arms you held, don't you know? He was so wild
with you that he was going to send a friend to you tomorrow morning."

"What nonsense!"

"Of course it is nonsense, and in nonsense it would have ended,
doubtless; but you know these fellows, they--"

"Excuse me, but I think you must have something else that you wished to
speak about, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"

"Of course, I have!" said the other, laughing. "You see, my dear fellow,
tomorrow, very early in the morning, I must be off to town about this
unfortunate business (my uncle, you know!). Just imagine, my dear sir, it
is all true--word for word--and, of course, everybody knew it excepting
myself. All this has been such a blow to me that I have not managed to
call in at the Epanchins'. Tomorrow I shall not see them either, because
I shall be in town. I may not be here for three days or more; in a word,
my affairs are a little out of gear. But though my town business is,
of course, most pressing, still I determined not to go away until I had
seen you, and had a clear understanding with you upon certain points;
and that without loss of time. I will wait now, if you will allow me,
until the company departs; I may just as well, for I have nowhere else
to go to, and I shall certainly not do any sleeping tonight; I'm far too
excited. And finally, I must confess that, though I know it is bad form
to pursue a man in this way, I have come to beg your friendship, my
dear prince. You are an unusual sort of a person; you don't lie at every
step, as some men do; in fact, you don't lie at all, and there is a
matter in which I need a true and sincere friend, for I really may claim
to be among the number of bona fide unfortunates just now."

He laughed again.

"But the trouble is," said the prince, after a slight pause for
reflection, "that goodness only knows when this party will break up.
Hadn't we better stroll into the park? I'll excuse myself, there's no
danger of their going away."

"No, no! I have my reasons for wishing them not to suspect us of being
engaged in any specially important conversation. There are gentry
present who are a little too much interested in us. You are not aware of
that perhaps, prince? It will be a great deal better if they see that
we are friendly just in an ordinary way. They'll all go in a couple of
hours, and then I'll ask you to give me twenty minutes-half an hour at
most."

"By all means! I assure you I am delighted--you need not have entered
into all these explanations. As for your remarks about friendship with
me--thanks, very much indeed. You must excuse my being a little absent
this evening. Do you know, I cannot somehow be attentive to anything
just now?"

"I see, I see," said Evgenie, smiling gently. His mirth seemed very near
the surface this evening.

"What do you see?" said the prince, startled.

"I don't want you to suspect that I have simply come here to deceive
you and pump information out of you!" said Evgenie, still smiling, and
without making any direct reply to the question.

"Oh, but I haven't the slightest doubt that you did come to pump me,"
said the prince, laughing himself, at last; "and I dare say you are
quite prepared to deceive me too, so far as that goes. But what of that?
I'm not afraid of you; besides, you'll hardly believe it, I feel
as though I really didn't care a scrap one way or the other, just
now!--And--and--and as you are a capital fellow, I am convinced of that, I
dare say we really shall end by being good friends. I like you very much
Evgenie Pavlovitch; I consider you a very good fellow indeed."

"Well, in any case, you are a most delightful man to have to deal with,
be the business what it may," concluded Evgenie. "Come along now, I'll
drink a glass to your health. I'm charmed to have entered into alliance
with you. By-the-by," he added suddenly, "has this young Hippolyte come
down to stay with you?"

"Yes."

"He's not going to die at once, I should think, is he?"

"Why?"

"Oh, I don't know. I've been half an hour here with him, and he--"

Hippolyte had been waiting for the prince all this time, and had never
ceased looking at him and Evgenie Pavlovitch as they conversed in the
corner. He became much excited when they approached the table once more.
He was disturbed in his mind, it seemed; perspiration stood in large
drops on his forehead; in his gleaming eyes it was easy to read
impatience and agitation; his gaze wandered from face to face of those
present, and from object to object in the room, apparently without aim.
He had taken a part, and an animated one, in the noisy conversation of
the company; but his animation was clearly the outcome of fever. His
talk was almost incoherent; he would break off in the middle of a
sentence which he had begun with great interest, and forget what he had
been saying. The prince discovered to his dismay that Hippolyte had been
allowed to drink two large glasses of champagne; the one now standing by
him being the third. All this he found out afterwards; at the moment he
did not notice anything, very particularly.

"Do you know I am specially glad that today is your birthday!" cried
Hippolyte.

"Why?"

"You'll soon see. D'you know I had a feeling that there would be a lot
of people here tonight? It's not the first time that my presentiments
have been fulfilled. I wish I had known it was your birthday, I'd have
brought you a present--perhaps I have got a present for you! Who knows?
Ha, ha! How long is it now before daylight?"

"Not a couple of hours," said Ptitsin, looking at his watch. "What's the
good of daylight now? One can read all night in the open air without
it," said someone.

"The good of it! Well, I want just to see a ray of the sun," said
Hippolyte. "Can one drink to the sun's health, do you think, prince?"

"Oh, I dare say one can; but you had better be calm and lie down,
Hippolyte--that's much more important.

"You are always preaching about resting; you are a regular nurse to me,
prince. As soon as the sun begins to 'resound' in the sky--what poet
said that? 'The sun resounded in the sky.' It is beautiful, though
there's no sense in it!--then we will go to bed. Lebedeff, tell me, is
the sun the source of life? What does the source, or 'spring,' of life
really mean in the Apocalypse? You have heard of the 'Star that is
called Wormwood,' prince?"

"I have heard that Lebedeff explains it as the railroads that cover
Europe like a net."

Everybody laughed, and Lebedeff got up abruptly.

"No! Allow me, that is not what we are discussing!" he cried, waving
