hand. "You're drunk--the police will be sent for if you don't look out.
Think where you are."

"Yes, he's boasting like a drunkard," added Nastasia, as though with the
sole intention of goading him.

"I do _not_ boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day.
Ptitsin, get the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but
get it by the evening! I'll show that I'm in earnest!" cried Rogojin,
working himself up into a frenzy of excitement.

"Come, come; what's all this?" cried General Ivolgin, suddenly and
angrily, coming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this sally on
the part of the hitherto silent old man caused some laughter among the
intruders.

"Halloa! what's this now?" laughed Rogojin. "You come along with me, old
fellow! You shall have as much to drink as you like."

"Oh, it's too horrible!" cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame and
annoyance.

"Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this
shameless creature out of the room?" cried Varia, suddenly. She was
shaking and trembling with rage.

"That's me, I suppose. I'm the shameless creature!" cried Nastasia
Philipovna, with amused indifference. "Dear me, and I came--like a fool,
as I am--to invite them over to my house for the evening! Look how your
sister treats me, Gavrila Ardalionovitch."

For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning, after
his sister's speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was really
about to leave the room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized her by
the arm like a madman.

"What have you done?" he hissed, glaring at her as though he would like
to annihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could
hardly articulate his words for rage.

"What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?"

"Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come here
to insult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low, base
wretch?" cried Varia, looking back at her brother with proud defiance.

A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still
holding her wrist tightly. Varia struggled once--twice--to get free;
then could restrain herself no longer, and spat in his face.

"There's a girl for you!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "Mr. Ptitsin, I
congratulate you on your choice."

Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia,
which would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand
caught his. Between him and Varia stood the prince.

"Enough--enough!" said the latter, with insistence, but all of a tremble
with excitement.

"Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!" cried Gania; and,
loosening his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince's face with all his
force.

Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as
death; he gazed into Gania's eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful
look; his lips trembled and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then
his mouth twisted into an incongruous smile.

"Very well--never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike
her!" he said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no
longer, and covering his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and
murmured in broken accents:

"Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!"

Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort
the prince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the
general.

"It's nothing, it's nothing!" said the prince, and again he wore the
smile which was so inconsistent with the circumstances.

"Yes, he will be ashamed!" cried Rogojin. "You will be properly ashamed
of yourself for having injured such a--such a sheep" (he could not find
a better word). "Prince, my dear fellow, leave this and come away with
me. I'll show you how Rogojin shows his affection for his friends."

Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania's action
and with the prince's reply.

Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so
little in harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to
put on for the occasion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings,
though she tried to conceal the fact and to look as though she were as
ready as ever for jesting and irony.

"I really think I must have seen him somewhere!" she murmured seriously
enough.

"Oh, aren't you ashamed of yourself--aren't you ashamed? Are you really
the sort of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is
it possible?" The prince was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of
reproach, which evidently came from his very heart.

Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently
concealed something beneath her smile and with some confusion and a
glance at Gania she left the room.

However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round,
walked quickly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it to
her lips.

"He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman," she whispered
hurriedly, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the
room so quickly that no one could imagine what she had come back for.
All they saw was that she said something to Nina Alexandrovna in a
hurried whisper, and seemed to kiss her hand. Varia, however, both saw
and heard all, and watched Nastasia out of the room with an expression
of wonder.

Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show her
out, but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.

"Don't come with me," she cried, "_Au revoir_, till the evening--do you
hear? _Au revoir!_"

He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever on
his soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered that
he did not even observe Rogojin's rowdy band crowd past him and step on
his toes, at the door as they went out. They were all talking at once.
Rogojin went ahead of the others, talking to Ptitsin, and apparently
insisting vehemently upon something very important.

"You've lost the game, Gania" he cried, as he passed the latter.

Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.

XI.

The prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber.
Colia followed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to
console him. The poor boy seemed to be already so attached to him that
he could hardly leave him.

"You were quite right to go away!" he said. "The row will rage there
worse than ever now; and it's like this every day with us--and all
through that Nastasia Philipovna."

"You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia," said the prince.

"Yes, indeed, and it is all our own fault. But I have a great friend who
is much worse off even than we are. Would you like to know him?"

"Yes, very much. Is he one of your school-fellows?"

"Well, not exactly. I will tell you all about him some day.... What do
you think of Nastasia Philipovna? She is beautiful, isn't she? I
had never seen her before, though I had a great wish to do so. She
fascinated me. I could forgive Gania if he were to marry her for love,
but for money! Oh dear! that is horrible!"

"Yes, your brother does not attract me much."

"I am not surprised at that. After what you... But I do hate that way
of looking at things! Because some fool, or a rogue pretending to be a
fool, strikes a man, that man is to be dishonoured for his whole life,
unless he wipes out the disgrace with blood, or makes his assailant beg
forgiveness on his knees! I think that so very absurd and tyrannical.
Lermontoff's Bal Masque is based on that idea--a stupid and unnatural
one, in my opinion; but he was hardly more than a child when he wrote
it."

"I like your sister very much."

"Did you see how she spat in Gania's face! Varia is afraid of no one.
But you did not follow her example, and yet I am sure it was not through
cowardice. Here she comes! Speak of a wolf and you see his tail! I felt
sure that she would come. She is very generous, though of course she has
her faults."

Varia pounced upon her brother.

"This is not the place for you," said she. "Go to father. Is he plaguing
you, prince?"

"Not in the least; on the contrary, he interests me."

"Scolding as usual, Varia! It is the worst thing about her. After all,
I believe father may have started off with Rogojin. No doubt he is sorry
now. Perhaps I had better go and see what he is doing," added Colia,
running off.

"Thank God, I have got mother away, and put her to bed without another
scene! Gania is worried--and ashamed--not without reason! What a
spectacle! I have come to thank you once more, prince, and to ask you if
you knew Nastasia Philipovna before?"

"No, I have never known her."

"Then what did you mean, when you said straight out to her that she was
not really 'like that'? You guessed right, I fancy. It is quite possible
she was not herself at the moment, though I cannot fathom her meaning.
Evidently she meant to hurt and insult us. I have heard curious tales
about her before now, but if she came to invite us to her house, why
did she behave so to my mother? Ptitsin knows her very well; he says he
could not understand her today. With Rogojin, too! No one with a spark
of self-respect could have talked like that in the house of her...
Mother is extremely vexed on your account, too...

"That is nothing!" said the prince, waving his hand.

"But how meek she was when you spoke to her!"

"Meek! What do you mean?"

"You told her it was a shame for her to behave so, and her manner
changed at once; she was like another person. You have some influence
over her, prince," added Varia, smiling a little.

The door opened at this point, and in came Gania most unexpectedly.

He was not in the least disconcerted to see Varia there, but he stood a
moment at the door, and then approached the prince quietly.

"Prince," he said, with feeling, "I was a blackguard. Forgive me!" His
face gave evidence of suffering. The prince was considerably amazed,
and did not reply at once. "Oh, come, forgive me, forgive me!" Gania
insisted, rather impatiently. "If you like, I'll kiss your hand. There!"

The prince was touched; he took Gania's hands, and embraced him
heartily, while each kissed the other.

"I never, never thought you were like that," said Muishkin, drawing a
deep breath. "I thought you--you weren't capable of--"

"Of what? Apologizing, eh? And where on earth did I get the idea
that you were an idiot? You always observe what other people pass by
unnoticed; one could talk sense to you, but--"

"Here is another to whom you should apologize," said the prince,
pointing to Varia.

"No, no! they are all enemies! I've tried them often enough, believe
me," and Gania turned his back on Varia with these words.

"But if I beg you to make it up?" said Varia.

"And you'll go to Nastasia Philipovna's this evening--"

"If you insist: but, judge for yourself, can I go, ought I to go?"

"But she is not that sort of woman, I tell you!" said Gania, angrily.
"She was only acting."

"I know that--I know that; but what a part to play! And think what she
must take _you_ for, Gania! I know she kissed mother's hand, and all that,
but she laughed at you, all the same. All this is not good enough
for seventy-five thousand roubles, my dear boy. You are capable of
honourable feelings still, and that's why I am talking to you so. Oh! _do_
take care what you are doing! Don't you know yourself that it will end
badly, Gania?"

So saying, and in a state of violent agitation, Varia left the room.

"There, they are all like that," said Gania, laughing, "just as if I do
not know all about it much better than they do."

He sat down with these words, evidently intending to prolong his visit.

"If you know it so well," said the prince a little timidly, "why do you
choose all this worry for the sake of the seventy-five thousand, which,
you confess, does not cover it?"

"I didn't mean that," said Gania; "but while we are upon the subject,
let me hear your opinion. Is all this worry worth seventy-five thousand
or not?

"Certainly not."

"Of course! And it would be a disgrace to marry so, eh?"

"A great disgrace."

"Oh, well, then you may know that I shall certainly do it, now. I shall
certainly marry her. I was not quite sure of myself before, but now I
am. Don't say a word: I know what you want to tell me--"

"No. I was only going to say that what surprises me most of all is your
extraordinary confidence."

"How so? What in?"

"That Nastasia Philipovna will accept you, and that the question is as
good as settled; and secondly, that even if she did, you would be able
to pocket the money. Of course, I know very little about it, but that's
my view. When a man marries for money it often happens that the wife
keeps the money in her own hands."

"Of course, you don't know all; but, I assure you, you needn't be
afraid, it won't be like that in our case. There are circumstances,"
said Gania, rather excitedly. "And as to her answer to me, there's no
doubt about that. Why should you suppose she will refuse me?"

"Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just now--"

"Oh she--they don't know anything about it! Nastasia was only chaffing
Rogojin. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now;
she was simply laughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I show
that I meant her money, and doesn't realize that there are other men
who would deceive her in far worse fashion. I'm not going to pretend
anything, and you'll see she'll marry me, all right. If she likes to
live quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of her nonsense, I
shall leave her at once, but I shall keep the money. I'm not going to
look a fool; that's the first thing, not to look a fool."

"But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a _sensible_ woman, and,
as such, why should she run blindly into this business? That's what
puzzles me so," said the prince.

"You don't know all, you see; I tell you there are things--and besides,
I'm sure that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction, and I
give you my word I have a strong suspicion that she loves me, too--in
her own way, of course. She thinks she will be able to make a sort of
slave of me all my life; but I shall prepare a little surprise for her.
I don't know whether I ought to be confidential with you, prince; but,
I assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have come across. I have
not spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years. There
are uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn't one honester
than Ptitsin, he's the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You don't
know, perhaps, that blackguards like honest people, and being one myself
I like you. _Why_ am I a blackguard? Tell me honestly, now. They all call
me a blackguard because of her, and I have got into the way of thinking
myself one. That's what is so bad about the business."

"_I_ for one shall never think you a blackguard again," said the prince.
"I confess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have been so
joyfully surprised about you just now; it's a good lesson for me. I
shall never judge again without a thorough trial. I see now that you are
not only not a blackguard, but are not even quite spoiled. I see that
you are quite an ordinary man, not original in the least degree, but
rather weak."

Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that
he did not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.

"Has my father asked you for money?" asked Gania, suddenly.

"No."

"Don't give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent, respectable
man once! He was received in the best society; he was not always the
liar he is now. Of course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a
good deal worse than an innocent liar now. Do you know that he keeps a
mistress? I can't understand how mother is so long-suffering. Did he
tell you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one about his
grey horse that talked? He loves to enlarge on these absurd histories."
And Gania burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the prince
and asked: "Why are you looking at me like that?"

"I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came
to make friends with me again just now, and you said, 'I will kiss your
hand, if you like,' just as a child would have said it. And then, all at
once you are talking of this mad project--of these seventy-five thousand
roubles! It all seems so absurd and impossible."

"Well, what conclusion have you reached?"

"That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would
do well to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara
Ardalionovna is right."

"Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very
well," replied Gania impatiently. "That is proved by my having this
conversation with you. It is not for money only, prince, that I am
rushing into this affair," he continued, hardly master of his words,
so closely had his vanity been touched. "If I reckoned on that I should
certainly be deceived, for I am still too weak in mind and character.
I am obeying a passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but one aim,
one that overmasters all else. You imagine that once I am in possession
of these seventy-five thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a
carriage... No, I shall go on wearing the old overcoat I have worn for
three years, and I shall give up my club. I shall follow the example of
men who have made their fortunes. When Ptitsin was seventeen he slept
in the street, he sold pen-knives, and began with a copeck; now he has
sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what has he not done? Well,
I shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start with a little
capital. In fifteen years people will say, 'Look, that's Ivolgin, the
king of the Jews!' You say that I have no originality. Now mark this,
prince--there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race
than to be told that he is wanting in originality, that he is weak
in character, has no particular talent, and is, in short, an ordinary
person. You have not even done me the honour of looking upon me as a
rogue. Do you know, I could have knocked you down for that just now! You
wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin, who thinks me capable of selling
him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly gratuitous idea on his part,
seeing there has never been any discussion of it between us! This has
exasperated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I will do it!
Once I am rich, I shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One of
the vilest and most hateful things connected with money is that it can
buy even talent; and will do so as long as the world lasts. You will say
that this is childish--or romantic. Well, that will be all the better
for me, but the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He laughs
most, who laughs last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply because,
socially, I am a nobody. However, enough for the present. Colia has put
his nose in to tell us dinner is ready, twice. I'm dining out. I shall
come and talk to you now and then; you shall be comfortable enough with
us. They are sure to make you one of the family. I think you and I
will either be great friends or enemies. Look here now, supposing I had
kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do in all sincerity, should I
have hated you for it afterwards?"

"Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up,
and would have ended by forgiving me," said the prince, after a pause
for reflection, and with a pleasant smile.

"Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven't you put a drop
of poison in that remark now, eh? By the way--ha, ha, ha!--I forgot to
ask, was I right in believing that you were a good deal struck yourself
with Nastasia Philipovna."

"Ye-yes."

"Are you in love with her?"

"N-no."

"And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come--it's all right. I'm not
going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous woman? Believe
it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski--not a bit of it, not a
bit of it! Not for ever so long! _Au revoir!_"

Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and
meditated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in
once more.

"I don't want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at
General Epanchin's."

Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the
general and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia's face how
painful it was to him to deliver the missive. The prince read it, rose,
and took his hat.

"It's only a couple of yards," said Colia, blushing.

"He's sitting there over his bottle--and how they can give him credit,
I cannot understand. Don't tell mother I brought you the note, prince;
I have sworn not to do it a thousand times, but I'm always so sorry for
him. Don't stand on ceremony, give him some trifle, and let that end
it."

"Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea," said the
prince.

XII.

Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off.
In one of the side rooms there sat at a table--looking like one of the
regular guests of the establishment--Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a
bottle before him, and a newspaper on his knee. He was waiting for
the prince, and no sooner did the latter appear than he began a long
harangue about something or other; but so far gone was he that the
prince could hardly understand a word.

"I have not got a ten-rouble note," said the prince; "but here is a
twenty-five. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be left
without a farthing myself."

"Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I--"

"Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been at
Nastasia Philipovna's?"

"I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I
had not in order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a
witness, that I did all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now
a father of altogether another type shall step into the scene. You shall
see; the old soldier shall lay bare this intrigue, or a shameless woman
will force her way into a respectable and noble family."

"Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way
to Nastasia Philipovna's tonight. I must go; I have business with her; I
was not invited but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass the
laws of propriety if only I can get in somehow or other."

"My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for this
rubbish I asked you to come over here" (he pocketed the money, however,
at this point), "it was to invite your alliance in the campaign against
Nastasia Philipovna tonight. How well it sounds, 'General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin.' That'll fetch her, I think, eh? Capital! We'll go at
nine; there's time yet."

"Where does she live?"

"Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square
there--It won't be a large party."

The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the prince
arrived; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had another, and
another, during the consumption of which he told pretty nearly the whole
story of his life. The prince was in despair. He felt that though he had
but applied to this miserable old drunkard because he saw no other way
of getting to Nastasia Philipovna's, yet he had been very wrong to put
the slightest confidence in such a man.

At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general
rose too, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle,
and staggered into the street.

Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so
foolish as to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to
get to Nastasia Philipovna's, even at the cost of a certain amount
of impropriety. But now the scandal threatened to be more than he
had bargained for. By this time Ardalion Alexandrovitch was quite
intoxicated, and he kept his companion listening while he discoursed
eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all kinds, interspersed with
torrents of recrimination against the members of his family. He insisted
that all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and time alone
would put an end to them.

At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a warm,
unhealthy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed through the
mud, and the iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the paving stones.
Crowds of melancholy people plodded wearily along the footpaths, with
here and there a drunken man among them.

"Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?" said the general. "Many of
my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served longer, and
suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of
a woman of rather questionable reputation! A man, look you, who has
thirteen bullets on his breast!... You don't believe it? Well, I can
assure you it was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed
to Paris, and left Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege.
Nelaton, the Tuileries surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name
of science, into the besieged city in order to attend my wounds. The
government knows all about it. 'That's the Ivolgin with thirteen bullets
in him!' That's how they speak of me.... Do you see that house, prince?
One of my old friends lives on the first floor, with his large family.
In this and five other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two in the
Morskaya, are all that remain of my personal friends. Nina Alexandrovna
gave them up long ago, but I keep in touch with them still... I may
say I find refreshment in this little coterie, in thus meeting my old
acquaintances and subordinates, who worship me still, in spite of all.
General Sokolovitch (by the way, I have not called on him lately, or
seen Anna Fedorovna)... You know, my dear prince, when a person does
not receive company himself, he gives up going to other people's houses
involuntarily. And yet... well... you look as if you didn't believe
me.... Well now, why should I not present the son of my old friend
and companion to this delightful family--General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin? You will see a lovely girl--what am I saying--a lovely girl?
No, indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of society: beauty,
education, culture--the woman question--poetry--everything! Added to
which is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty
thousand roubles. No bad thing, eh?... In a word I absolutely must
introduce you to them: it is a duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin. Tableau!"

"At once? Now? You must have forgotten..." began the prince.

"No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house--up this
magnificent staircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but .... it
is a holiday... and the man has gone off... Drunken fool! Why have they
not got rid of him? Sokolovitch owes all the happiness he has had in
the service and in his private life to me, and me alone, but... here we
are."

The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of
irritating the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that General
Sokolovitch and his family would fade away like a mirage in the desert,
so that the visitors could escape, by merely returning downstairs. But
to his horror he saw that General Ivolgin was quite familiar with the
house, and really seemed to have friends there. At every step he named
some topographical or biographical detail that left nothing to be
desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at last, on the
first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to the right,
the prince decided to run away, but a curious incident stopped him
momentarily.

"You have made a mistake, general," said he. "The name on the door is
Koulakoff, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch."

"Koulakoff... Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch's flat, and
I am ringing at his door.... What do I care for Koulakoff?... Here comes
someone to open."

In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman informed the
visitors that the family were all away.

"What a pity! What a pity! It's just my luck!" repeated Ardalion
Alexandrovitch over and over again, in regretful tones. "When your
master and mistress return, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin
and Prince Muishkin desired to present themselves, and that they were
extremely sorry, excessively grieved..."

Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the
back of the hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre
colours, probably a housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she
came forward with a look of suspicion on her face.

"Marie Alexandrovna is not at home," said she, staring hard at the
general. "She has gone to her mother's, with Alexandra Michailovna."

"Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe
it, I am always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to
present my compliments to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her... tell
her, that with my whole heart I wish for her what she wished for herself
on Thursday evening, while she was listening to Chopin's Ballade. She
will remember. I wish it with all sincerity. General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin!"

The woman's face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.

"I will not fail to deliver your message," she replied, and bowed them
out.

As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had
failed to introduce the prince to his friends.

"You know I am a bit of a poet," said he. "Have you noticed it? The
poetic soul, you know." Then he added suddenly--"But after all...
after all I believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that the
Sokolovitch's live in another house, and what is more, they are just
now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly was at fault. However, it is of no
consequence."

"Just tell me," said the prince in reply, "may I count still on your
assistance? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?"

"Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question,
when it is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends?
You don't know Ivolgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock;
that's how the first squadron I commanded spoke of me. 'Depend upon
Ivolgin,' said they all, 'he is as steady as a rock.' But, excuse me,
I must just call at a house on our way, a house where I have found
consolation and help in all my trials for years."

"You are going home?"

"No... I wish... to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain
Terentieff, my old subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my
courage, and to bear the trials of my domestic life, and as I have an
extra burden on my mind today..."

"It seems to me," interrupted the prince, "that I was foolish to trouble
you just now. However, at present you... Good-bye!"

"Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!" cried
the general. "My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family; her
words come straight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A visit
to her is merely an affair of a few minutes; I am quite at home in her
house. I will have a wash, and dress, and then we can drive to the Grand
Theatre. Make up your mind to spend the evening with me.... We are
just there--that's the house... Why, Colia! you here! Well, is Marfa
Borisovna at home or have you only just come?"

"Oh no! I have been here a long while," replied Colia, who was at the
front door when the general met him. "I am keeping Hippolyte company.
He is worse, and has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some cards.
Marfa Borisovna expects you. But what a state you are in, father!" added
the boy, noticing his father's unsteady gait. "Well, let us go in."

On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though
he made up his mind to stay as short a time as possible. He wanted
Colia, but firmly resolved to leave the general behind. He could not
forgive himself for being so simple as to imagine that Ivolgin would be
of any use. The three climbed up the long staircase until they reached
the fourth floor where Madame Terentieff lived.

"You intend to introduce the prince?" asked Colia, as they went up.

"Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin! But what's the matter?... what?... How is Marfa Borisovna?"

"You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all!
She is ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day
before yesterday and she is expecting the money. Why did you promise her
any? You are always the same! Well, now you will have to get out of it
as best you can."

They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor. Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed Muishkin in
front.

"I will wait here," he stammered. "I should like to surprise her. ...."

Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the
house peeped out. The surprise of the general's imagination fell very
flat, for she at once began to address him in terms of reproach.

Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a
dressing-jacket, her feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her
hair was in dozens of small plaits. No sooner did she catch sight of
Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she screamed:

"There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart
misgave me!"

The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.

"Come, let us go in--it's all right," he whispered in the prince's ear.

But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors
had crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room,
furnished with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables,
Madame Terentieff, in the shrill tones habitual to her, continued her
stream of invectives.

"Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant!
You have robbed me of all I possessed--you have sucked my bones to the
marrow. How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!"

"Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin," stammered the disconcerted old
man.

"Would you believe," said the mistress of the house, suddenly addressing
the prince, "would you believe that that man has not even spared my
orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold everything,
pawned everything; he has left me nothing--nothing! What am I to do with
your IOU's, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer, devourer! answer,
heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish
them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh
how, have I offended the Almighty, that He should bring this curse upon
me! Answer, you worthless villain, answer!"

But this was too much for the general.

"Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I
can give... and I owe even these to the prince's generosity--my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse
me, I am very weak," he continued, standing in the centre of the
room, and bowing to all sides. "I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a
cushion... my dear!"

Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and
placed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much
more, but as soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to
the wall, and slept the sleep of the just.

With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to
a chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned
her right cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on
Muishkin, now and again sighing deeply. The three children, two little
girls and a boy, Lenotchka being the eldest, came and leant on the
table and also stared steadily at him. Presently Colia appeared from the
adjoining room.

"I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia," said the prince.
"Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I
asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he
has gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not
know the street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand
Theatre."

"Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth
my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you should
have depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five
Corners, and it is quite close by. Will you go directly? It is just
half-past nine. I will show you the way with pleasure."

Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to
pay for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.

"I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte," said Colia.
"He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next
room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering
the circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as
it concerns my father, while it is _his_ mother. That, of course, makes
a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not
disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion
is wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is
an extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave to his
opinions."

"Do you say he is consumptive?"

"Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother
and sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a
little money, we should leave our respective families, and live together
in a little apartment of our own. It is our dream. But, do you know,
when I was talking over your affair with him, he was angry, and said
that anyone who did not call out a man who had given him a blow was a
coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off arguing the matter
with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to go and see her?"

"To tell the truth, she has not."

"Then how do you come to be going there?" cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. "And...
and are you going to her 'At Home' in that costume?"

"I don't know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she will
receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my
clothes--what can I do?"

"Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?"

"No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on business
it is difficult to explain, but..."

"Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want
to know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not
be going there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company--cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here,
and hardly any whom one can respect, although people put on airs--Varia
especially! Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are
nowadays? Especially here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I
never can understand. There used to be a certain amount of solidity in
all things, but now what happens? Everything is exposed to the public
gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is probed by careless fingers.
We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous revelations. Parents
blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At Moscow lately
a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing--at nothing, mind
you!--to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now
it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is,
and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that's true! I pity
him, to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would
laugh at me--but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after
all? Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last.
Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity.
He talks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital;
the devil knows what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so,
but he is soured by his troubles. Just imagine-the general keeps his
mother-but she lends him money! She lends it for a week or ten days
at very high interest! Isn't it disgusting? And then, you would hardly
believe it, but my mother--Nina Alexandrovna--helps Hippolyte in all
sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as
helping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares
nothing about them, and Varia does the same."

"Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about,
that there were only money-grubbers--and here they are quite close at
hand, these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think
there is a good deal of moral strength in helping people in such
circumstances."

"Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her--yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought
it vulgar of her--but now, he is sometimes quite touched and overcome by
her kindness. H'm! You call that being strong and good? I will remember
that! Gania knows nothing about it. He would say that it was encouraging
vice."

"Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that
Gania does not know," exclaimed the prince, as he considered Colia's
last words.

"Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget
about this afternoon."

"I like you too, Colia."

"Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?" said Colia.
"I mean to get something to do directly, and earn money. Then shall we
three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a flat, and
let the general come and visit us. What do you say?"

"It would be very pleasant," returned the prince. "But we must see. I am
really rather worried just now. What! are we there already? Is that the
house? What a long flight of steps! And there's a porter! Well, Colia I
don't know what will come of it all."

The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.

"You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don't be afraid. I wish you
success; we agree so entirely I that can do so, although I do not
understand why you are here. Good-bye!" cried Colia excitedly. "Now I
will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals! But
as to your getting in--don't be in the least afraid. You will see her.
She is so original about everything. It's the first floor. The porter
will show you."

XIII.

The prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did his
best to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing that
could happen to him would be that he would not be received, or, perhaps,
received, then laughed at for coming.

But there was another question, which terrified him considerably,
and that was: what was he going to do when he _did_ get in? And to this
question he could fashion no satisfactory reply.

If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia
Philipovna and saying to her: "Don't ruin yourself by marrying this man.
He does not love you, he only loves your money. He told me so himself,
and so did Aglaya Ivanovna, and I have come on purpose to warn you"--but
even that did not seem quite a legitimate or practicable thing to do.
Then, again, there was another delicate question, to which he could not
find an answer; dared not, in fact, think of it; but at the very idea
of which he trembled and blushed. However, in spite of all his fears and
heart-quakings he went in, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna.

Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat,
beautifully furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years
of Petersburg life, Totski had certainly not spared his expenditure upon
her. He had calculated upon her eventual love, and tried to tempt her
with a lavish outlay upon comforts and luxuries, knowing too well how
easily the heart accustoms itself to comforts, and how difficult it is
to tear one's self away from luxuries which have become habitual and,
little by little, indispensable.

Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and
luxuries, but, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree,
dependent upon them, and always gave the impression that she could do
just as well without them. In fact, she went so far as to inform Totski
on several occasions that such was the case, which the latter gentleman
considered a very unpleasant communication indeed.

But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features
and characteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor reckoned
upon in former times, and some of these fascinated him, even now, in
spite of the fact that all his old calculations with regard to her were
long ago cast to the winds.

A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia's servants were all
females) and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to
her mistress without any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his
wide-brimmed hat, nor his sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion of
manner, produced the least impression upon her. She helped him off with
his cloak, and begged him to wait a moment in the ante-room while she
announced him.

The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna's consisted of none but her
most intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison with
her usual gatherings on this anniversary.

In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin.
They were both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under
a half-hidden feeling of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia's
deliberations with regard to Gania, which result was to be made public
this evening.

Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as
his elders, but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had
determined not to bring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked
after her, though no sooner had he arrived than she had reminded him of
the episode between himself and the prince. The general, who had heard
nothing of it before, began to listen with some interest, while Gania,
drily, but with perfect candour, went through the whole history,
including the fact of his apology to the prince. He finished by
declaring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and goodness
knows why he had been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very far
from being one.

Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation
soon turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the
greatest attraction to both Totski and the general.

Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin's conduct
since the afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money for
the latter ever since, and up to nine o'clock, Rogojin having declared
that he must absolutely have a hundred thousand roubles by the evening.
He added that Rogojin was drunk, of course; but that he thought the
money would be forthcoming, for the excited and intoxicated rapture of
the fellow impelled him to give any interest or premium that was asked
of him, and there were several others engaged in beating up the money,
also.

All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy interest.
Nastasia was silent, and would not say what she thought about it. Gania
was equally uncommunicative. The general seemed the most anxious of all,
and decidedly uneasy. The present of pearls which he had prepared with
so much joy in the morning had been accepted but coldly, and Nastasia
had smiled rather disagreeably as she took it from him. Ferdishenko was
the only person present in good spirits.

Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and
was usually the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent
as any on this occasion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon
perturbation.

The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows
why invited; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather
loud woman of about forty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty,
well-dressed German lady who hardly said a word all the evening) not
only had no gift for enlivening the proceedings, but hardly knew what to
say for themselves when addressed. Under these circumstances the arrival
of the prince came almost as a godsend.

The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some
smiles, especially when it became evident, from Nastasia's astonished
look, that she had not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment
once over, Nastasia showed such satisfaction that all prepared to greet
the prince with cordial smiles of welcome.

"Of course," remarked General Epanchin, "he does this out of pure
innocence. It's a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort of
freedom; but it is rather a good thing that he has arrived just at this
moment. He may enliven us a little with his originalities."

"Especially as he asked himself," said Ferdishenko.

