me. In a word, I showed him that I was not going to give way. He looked
at me with an air of infinite resentment. Then he snatched up my
passport, and departed with it upstairs. A minute later the passport
had been visaed! Here it is now, if you care to see it,"--and I pulled
out the document, and exhibited the Roman visa.

"But--" the General began.

"What really saved you was the fact that you proclaimed yourself a
heretic and a barbarian," remarked the Frenchman with a smile. "Cela
n'etait pas si bete."

"But is that how Russian subjects ought to be treated? Why, when they
settle here they dare not utter even a word--they are ready even to
deny the fact that they are Russians! At all events, at my hotel in
Paris I received far more attention from the company after I had told
them about the fracas with the sacristan. A fat Polish nobleman, who
had been the most offensive of all who were present at the table
d'hote, at once went upstairs, while some of the Frenchmen were simply
disgusted when I told them that two years ago I had encountered a man
at whom, in 1812, a French 'hero' fired for the mere fun of discharging
his musket. That man was then a boy of ten and his family are still
residing in Moscow."

"Impossible!" the Frenchman spluttered. "No French soldier would fire
at a child!"

"Nevertheless the incident was as I say," I replied. "A very respected
ex-captain told me the story, and I myself could see the scar left on
his cheek."

The Frenchman then began chattering volubly, and the General supported
him; but I recommended the former to read, for example, extracts from
the memoirs of General Perovski, who, in 1812, was a prisoner in the
hands of the French. Finally Maria Philipovna said something to
interrupt the conversation. The General was furious with me for having
started the altercation with the Frenchman. On the other hand, Mr.
Astley seemed to take great pleasure in my brush with Monsieur, and,
rising from the table, proposed that we should go and have a drink
together. The same afternoon, at four o'clock, I went to have my
customary talk with Polina Alexandrovna; and, the talk soon extended to
a stroll. We entered the Park, and approached the Casino, where Polina
seated herself upon a bench near the fountain, and sent Nadia away to a
little distance to play with some other children. Mischa also I
dispatched to play by the fountain, and in this fashion we--that is to
say, Polina and myself--contrived to find ourselves alone.

Of course, we began by talking on business matters. Polina seemed
furious when I handed her only 700 gulden, for she had thought to
receive from Paris, as the proceeds of the pledging of her diamonds, at
least 2000 gulden, or even more.

"Come what may, I MUST have money," she said. "And get it somehow I
will--otherwise I shall be ruined."

I asked her what had happened during my absence.

"Nothing; except that two pieces of news have reached us from St.
Petersburg. In the first place, my grandmother is very ill, and
unlikely to last another couple of days. We had this from Timothy
Petrovitch himself, and he is a reliable person. Every moment we are
expecting to receive news of the end."

"All of you are on the tiptoe of expectation?" I queried.

"Of course--all of us, and every minute of the day. For a
year-and-a-half now we have been looking for this."

"Looking for it?"

"Yes, looking for it. I am not her blood relation, you know--I am
merely the General's step-daughter.  Yet I am certain that the old lady
has remembered me in her will."

"Yes, I believe that you WILL come in for a good deal," I said with
some assurance.

"Yes, for she is fond of me. But how come you to think so?"

I answered this question with another one. "That Marquis of yours," I
said, "--is HE also familiar with your family secrets?"

"And why are you yourself so interested in them?" was her retort as she
eyed me with dry grimness.

"Never mind. If I am not mistaken, the General has succeeded in
borrowing money of the Marquis."

"It may be so."

"Is it likely that the Marquis would have lent the money if he had not
known something or other about your grandmother? Did you notice, too,
that three times during luncheon, when speaking of her, he called her
'La Baboulenka'? [Dear little Grandmother]. What loving, friendly
behaviour, to be sure!"

"Yes, that is true. As soon as ever he learnt that I was likely to
inherit something from her he began to pay me his addresses. I thought
you ought to know that."

"Then he has only just begun his courting? Why, I thought he had been
doing so a long while!"

"You KNOW he has not," retorted Polina angrily. "But where on earth did
you pick up this Englishman?" She said this after a pause.

"I KNEW you would ask about him!" Whereupon I told her of my previous
encounters with Astley while travelling.

"He is very shy," I said, "and susceptible. Also, he is in love with
you.--"

"Yes, he is in love with me," she replied.

"And he is ten times richer than the Frenchman. In fact, what does the
Frenchman possess? To me it seems at least doubtful that he possesses
anything at all."

"Oh, no, there is no doubt about it. He does possess some chateau or
other. Last night the General told me that for certain. NOW are you
satisfied?"

"Nevertheless, in your place I should marry the Englishman."

"And why?" asked Polina.

"Because, though the Frenchman is the handsomer of the two, he is also
the baser; whereas the Englishman is not only a man of honour, but ten
times the wealthier of the pair."

"Yes? But then the Frenchman is a marquis, and the cleverer of the
two," remarked Polina imperturbably.

"Is that so?" I repeated.

"Yes; absolutely."

Polina was not at all pleased at my questions; I could see that she was
doing her best to irritate me with the brusquerie of her answers. But I
took no notice of this.

"It amuses me to see you grow angry," she continued. "However, inasmuch
as I allow you to indulge in these questions and conjectures, you ought
to pay me something for the privilege."

"I consider that I have a perfect right to put these questions to you,"
was my calm retort; "for the reason that I am ready to pay for them,
and also care little what becomes of me."

Polina giggled.

"Last time you told me--when on the Shlangenberg--that at a word from
me you would be ready to jump down a thousand feet into the abyss. Some
day I may remind you of that saying, in order to see if you will be as
good as your word. Yes, you may depend upon it that I shall do so. I
hate you because I have allowed you to go to such lengths, and I also
hate you and still more--because you are so necessary to me. For the
time being I want you, so I must keep you."

Then she made a movement to rise. Her tone had sounded very angry.
Indeed, of late her talks with me had invariably ended on a note of
temper and irritation--yes, of real temper.

"May I ask you who is this Mlle. Blanche?" I inquired (since I did not
wish Polina to depart without an explanation).

"You KNOW who she is--just Mlle. Blanche. Nothing further has
transpired. Probably she will soon be Madame General--that is to say,
if the rumours that Grandmamma is nearing her end should prove true.
Mlle. Blanche, with her mother and her cousin, the Marquis, know very
well that, as things now stand, we are ruined."

"And is the General at last in love?"

"That has nothing to do with it. Listen to me. Take these 700 florins,
and go and play roulette with them. Win as much for me as you can, for
I am badly in need of money."

So saying, she called Nadia back to her side, and entered the Casino,
where she joined the rest of our party. For myself, I took, in musing
astonishment, the first path to the left. Something had seemed to
strike my brain when she told me to go and play roulette. Strangely
enough, that something had also seemed to make me hesitate, and to set
me analysing my feelings with regard to her. In fact, during the two
weeks of my absence I had felt far more at my ease than I did now, on
the day of my return; although, while travelling, I had moped like an
imbecile, rushed about like a man in a fever, and actually beheld her
in my dreams. Indeed, on one occasion (this happened in Switzerland,
when I was asleep in the train) I had spoken aloud to her, and set all
my fellow-travellers laughing. Again, therefore, I put to myself the
question: "Do I, or do I not love her?" and again I could return myself
no answer or, rather, for the hundredth time I told myself that I
detested her. Yes, I detested her; there were moments (more especially
at the close of our talks together) when I would gladly have given half
my life to have strangled her! I swear that, had there, at such
moments, been a sharp knife ready to my hand, I would have seized that
knife with pleasure, and plunged it into her breast. Yet I also swear
that if, on the Shlangenberg, she had REALLY said to me, "Leap into
that abyss," I should have leapt into it, and with equal pleasure. Yes,
this I knew well. One way or the other, the thing must soon be ended.
She, too, knew it in some curious way; the thought that I was fully
conscious of her inaccessibility, and of the impossibility of my ever
realising my dreams, afforded her, I am certain, the keenest possible
pleasure. Otherwise, is it likely that she, the cautious and clever
woman that she was, would have indulged in this familiarity and
openness with me? Hitherto (I concluded) she had looked upon me in the
same light that the old Empress did upon her servant--the Empress who
hesitated not to unrobe herself before her slave, since she did not
account a slave a man. Yes, often Polina must have taken me for
something less than a man!"

Still, she had charged me with a commission--to win what I could at
roulette. Yet all the time I could not help wondering WHY it was so
necessary for her to win something, and what new schemes could have
sprung to birth in her ever-fertile brain. A host of new and unknown
factors seemed to have arisen during the last two weeks. Well, it
behoved me to divine them, and to probe them, and that as soon as
possible. Yet not now: at the present moment I must repair to the
roulette-table.



II

I confess I did not like it. Although I had made up my mind to play, I
felt averse to doing so on behalf of some one else. In fact, it almost
upset my balance, and I entered the gaming rooms with an angry feeling
at my heart. At first glance the scene irritated me. Never at any time
have I been able to bear the flunkeyishness which one meets in the
Press of the world at large, but more especially in that of Russia,
where, almost every evening, journalists write on two subjects in
particular namely, on the splendour and luxury of the casinos to be
found in the Rhenish towns, and on the heaps of gold which are daily to
be seen lying on their tables.  Those journalists are not paid for
doing so: they write thus merely out of a spirit of disinterested
complaisance. For there is nothing splendid about the establishments in
question; and, not only are there no heaps of gold to be seen lying on
their tables, but also there is very little money to be seen at all. Of
course, during the season, some madman or another may make his
appearance--generally an Englishman, or an Asiatic, or a Turk--and (as
had happened during the summer of which I write) win or lose a great
deal; but, as regards the rest of the crowd, it plays only for petty
gulden, and seldom does much wealth figure on the board.

When, on the present occasion, I entered the gaming-rooms (for the
first time in my life), it was several moments before I could even make
up my mind to play. For one thing, the crowd oppressed me. Had I been
playing for myself, I think I should have left at once, and never have
embarked upon gambling at all, for I could feel my heart beginning to
beat, and my heart was anything but cold-blooded. Also, I knew, I had
long ago made up my mind, that never should I depart from Roulettenberg
until some radical, some final, change had taken place in my fortunes.
Thus, it must and would be. However ridiculous it may seem to you that
I was expecting to win at roulette, I look upon the generally accepted
opinion concerning the folly and the grossness of hoping to win at
gambling as a thing even more absurd. For why is gambling a whit worse
than any other method of acquiring money? How, for instance, is it
worse than trade? True, out of a hundred persons, only one can win; yet
what business is that of yours or of mine?

At all events, I confined myself at first simply to looking on, and
decided to attempt nothing serious. Indeed, I felt that, if I began to
do anything at all, I should do it in an absent-minded, haphazard sort
of way--of that I felt certain. Also, it behoved me to learn the game
itself; since, despite a thousand descriptions of roulette which I had
read with ceaseless avidity, I knew nothing of its rules, and had never
even seen it played.

In the first place, everything about it seemed to me so foul--so
morally mean and foul. Yet I am not speaking of the hungry, restless
folk who, by scores nay, even by hundreds--could be seen crowded around
the gaming-tables. For in a desire to win quickly and to win much I can
see nothing sordid; I have always applauded the opinion of a certain
dead and gone, but cocksure, moralist who replied to the excuse that
"one may always gamble moderately", by saying that to do so makes
things worse, since, in that case, the profits too will always be
moderate.

Insignificant profits and sumptuous profits do not stand on the same
footing. No, it is all a matter of proportion. What may seem a small
sum to a Rothschild may seem a large sum to me, and it is not the fault
of stakes or of winnings that everywhere men can be found winning, can
be found depriving their fellows of something, just as they do at
roulette. As to the question whether stakes and winnings are, in
themselves, immoral is another question altogether, and I wish to
express no opinion upon it. Yet the very fact that I was full of a
strong desire to win caused this gambling for gain, in spite of its
attendant squalor, to contain, if you will, something intimate,
something sympathetic, to my eyes: for it is always pleasant to see men
dispensing with ceremony, and acting naturally, and in an unbuttoned
mood....

Yet, why should I so deceive myself? I could see that the whole thing
was a vain and unreasoning pursuit; and what, at the first glance,
seemed to me the ugliest feature in this mob of roulette players was
their respect for their occupation--the seriousness, and even the
humility, with which they stood around the gaming tables. Moreover, I
had always drawn sharp distinctions between a game which is de mauvais
genre and a game which is permissible to a decent man. In fact, there
are two sorts of gaming--namely, the game of the gentleman and the game
of the plebs--the game for gain, and the game of the herd. Herein, as
said, I draw sharp distinctions. Yet how essentially base are the
distinctions! For instance, a gentleman may stake, say, five or ten
louis d'or--seldom more, unless he is a very rich man, when he may
stake, say, a thousand francs; but, he must do this simply for the love
of the game itself--simply for sport, simply in order to observe the
process of winning or of losing, and, above all things, as a man who
remains quite uninterested in the possibility of his issuing a winner.
If he wins, he will be at liberty, perhaps, to give vent to a laugh, or
to pass a remark on the circumstance to a bystander, or to stake again,
or to double his stake; but, even this he must do solely out of
curiosity, and for the pleasure of watching the play of chances and of
calculations, and not because of any vulgar desire to win. In a word,
he must look upon the gaming-table, upon roulette, and upon trente et
quarante, as mere relaxations which have been arranged solely for his
amusement. Of the existence of the lures and gains upon which the bank
is founded and maintained he must profess to have not an inkling. Best
of all, he ought to imagine his fellow-gamblers and the rest of the mob
which stands trembling over a coin to be equally rich and gentlemanly
with himself, and playing solely for recreation and pleasure. This
complete ignorance of the realities, this innocent view of mankind, is
what, in my opinion, constitutes the truly aristocratic. For instance,
I have seen even fond mothers so far indulge their guileless, elegant
daughters--misses of fifteen or sixteen--as to give them a few gold
coins and teach them how to play; and though the young ladies may have
won or have lost, they have invariably laughed, and departed as though
they were well pleased. In the same way, I saw our General once
approach the table in a stolid, important manner. A lacquey darted to
offer him a chair, but the General did not even notice him. Slowly he
took out his money bags, and slowly extracted 300 francs in gold, which
he staked on the black, and won. Yet he did not take up his
winnings--he left them there on the table. Again the black turned up,
and again he did not gather in what he had won; and when, in the third
round, the RED turned up he lost, at a stroke, 1200 francs. Yet even
then he rose with a smile, and thus preserved his reputation; yet I
knew that his money bags must be chafing his heart, as well as that,
had the stake been twice or thrice as much again, he would still have
restrained himself from venting his disappointment.

On the other hand, I saw a Frenchman first win, and then lose, 30,000
francs cheerfully, and without a murmur. Yes; even if a gentleman
should lose his whole substance, he must never give way to annoyance.
Money must be so subservient to gentility as never to be worth a
thought.  Of course, the SUPREMELY aristocratic thing is to be entirely
oblivious of the mire of rabble, with its setting; but sometimes a
reverse course may be aristocratic to remark, to scan, and even to gape
at, the mob (for preference, through a lorgnette), even as though one
were taking the crowd and its squalor for a sort of raree show which
had been organised specially for a gentleman's diversion. Though one
may be squeezed by the crowd, one must look as though one were fully
assured of being the observer--of having neither part nor lot with the
observed. At the same time, to stare fixedly about one is unbecoming;
for that, again, is ungentlemanly, seeing that no spectacle is worth an
open stare--are no spectacles in the world which merit from a gentleman
too pronounced an inspection.

However, to me personally the scene DID seem to be worth undisguised
contemplation--more especially in view of the fact that I had come
there not only to look at, but also to number myself sincerely and
wholeheartedly with, the mob. As for my secret moral views, I had no
room for them amongst my actual, practical opinions. Let that stand as
written: I am writing only to relieve my conscience. Yet let me say
also this: that from the first I have been consistent in having an
intense aversion to any trial of my acts and thoughts by a moral
standard. Another standard altogether has directed my life....

As a matter of fact, the mob was playing in exceedingly foul fashion.
Indeed, I have an idea that sheer robbery was going on around that
gaming-table. The croupiers who sat at the two ends of it had not only
to watch the stakes, but also to calculate the game--an immense amount
of work for two men! As for the crowd itself--well, it consisted mostly
of Frenchmen. Yet I was not then taking notes merely in order to be
able to give you a description of roulette, but in order to get my
bearings as to my behaviour when I myself should begin to play. For
example, I noticed that nothing was more common than for another's hand
to stretch out and grab one's winnings whenever one had won. Then there
would arise a dispute, and frequently an uproar; and it would be a case
of "I beg of you to prove, and to produce witnesses to the fact, that
the stake is yours."

At first the proceedings were pure Greek to me. I could only divine and
distinguish that stakes were hazarded on numbers, on "odd" or "even,"
and on colours. Polina's money I decided to risk, that evening, only to
the amount of 100 gulden. The thought that I was not going to play for
myself quite unnerved me. It was an unpleasant sensation, and I tried
hard to banish it. I had a feeling that, once I had begun to play for
Polina, I should wreck my own fortunes. Also, I wonder if any one has
EVER approached a gaming-table without falling an immediate prey to
superstition? I began by pulling out fifty gulden, and staking them on
"even." The wheel spun and stopped at 13. I had lost! With a feeling
like a sick qualm, as though I would like to make my way out of the
crowd and go home, I staked another fifty gulden--this time on the red.
The red turned up. Next time I staked the 100 gulden just where they
lay--and again the red turned up. Again I staked the whole sum, and
again the red turned up. Clutching my 400 gulden, I placed 200 of them
on twelve figures, to see what would come of it. The result was that
the croupier paid me out three times my total stake! Thus from 100
gulden my store had grown to 800! Upon that such a curious, such an
inexplicable, unwonted feeling overcame me that I decided to depart.
Always the thought kept recurring to me that if I had been playing for
myself alone I should never have had such luck. Once more I staked the
whole 800 gulden on the "even." The wheel stopped at 4. I was paid out
another 800 gulden, and, snatching up my pile of 1600, departed in
search of Polina  Alexandrovna.

I found the whole party walking in the park, and was able to get an
interview with her only after supper. This time the Frenchman was
absent from the meal, and the General seemed to be in a more expansive
vein. Among other things, he thought it necessary to remind me that he
would be sorry to see me playing at the gaming-tables. In his opinion,
such conduct would greatly compromise him--especially if I were to lose
much. "And even if you were to WIN much I should be compromised," he
added in a meaning sort of way. "Of course I have no RIGHT to order
your actions, but you yourself will agree that..." As usual, he did not
finish his sentence. I answered drily that I had very little money in
my possession, and that, consequently, I was hardly in a position to
indulge in any conspicuous play, even if I did gamble. At last, when
ascending to my own room, I succeeded in handing Polina her winnings,
and told her that, next time, I should not play for her.

"Why not?" she asked excitedly.

"Because I wish to play FOR MYSELF," I replied with a feigned glance of
astonishment. "That is my sole reason."

"Then are you so certain that your roulette-playing will get us out of
our difficulties?" she inquired with a quizzical smile.

I said very seriously, "Yes," and then added: "Possibly my certainty
about winning may seem to you ridiculous; yet, pray leave me in peace."

Nonetheless she insisted that I ought to go halves with her in the
day's winnings, and offered me 800 gulden on condition that henceforth,
I gambled only on those terms; but I refused to do so, once and for
all--stating, as my reason, that I found myself unable to play on
behalf of any one else, "I am not unwilling so to do," I added, "but in
all probability I should lose."

"Well, absurd though it be, I place great hopes on your playing of
roulette," she remarked musingly; "wherefore, you ought to play as my
partner and on equal shares; wherefore, of course, you will do as I
wish."

Then she left me without listening to any further protests on my part.



III

On the morrow she said not a word to me about gambling. In fact, she
purposely avoided me, although her old manner to me had not changed:
the same serene coolness was hers on meeting me--a coolness that was
mingled even with a spice of contempt and dislike. In short, she was at
no pains to conceal her aversion to me. That I could see plainly. Also,
she did not trouble to conceal from me the fact that I was necessary to
her, and that she was keeping me for some end which she had in view.
Consequently there became established between us relations which, to a
large extent, were incomprehensible to me, considering her general
pride and aloofness. For example, although she knew that I was madly in
love with her, she allowed me to speak to her of my passion (though she
could not well have showed her contempt for me more than by permitting
me, unhindered and unrebuked, to mention to her my love).

"You see," her attitude expressed, "how little I regard your feelings,
as well as how little I care for what you say to me, or for what you
feel for me." Likewise, though she spoke as before concerning her
affairs, it was never with complete frankness. In her contempt for me
there were refinements. Although she knew well that I was aware of a
certain circumstance in her life of something which might one day cause
her trouble, she would speak to me about her affairs (whenever she had
need of me for a given end) as though I were a slave or a passing
acquaintance--yet tell them me only in so far as one would need to know
them if one were going to be made temporary use of. Had I not known the
whole chain of events, or had she not seen how much I was pained and
disturbed by her teasing insistency, she would never have thought it
worthwhile to soothe me with this frankness--even though, since she not
infrequently used me to execute commissions that were not only
troublesome, but risky, she ought, in my opinion, to have been frank in
ANY case. But, forsooth, it was not worth her while to trouble about MY
feelings--about the fact that I was uneasy, and, perhaps, thrice as put
about by her cares and misfortunes as she was herself!

For three weeks I had known of her intention to take to roulette. She
had even warned me that she would like me to play on her behalf, since
it was unbecoming for her to play in person; and, from the tone of her
words I had gathered that there was something on her mind besides a
mere desire to win money. As if money could matter to HER! No, she had
some end in view, and there were circumstances at which I could guess,
but which I did not know for certain. True, the slavery and abasement
in which she held me might have given me (such things often do so) the
power to question her with abrupt directness (seeing that, inasmuch as
I figured in her eyes as a mere slave and nonentity, she could not very
well have taken offence at any rude curiosity); but the fact was that,
though she let me question her, she never returned me a single answer,
and at times did not so much as notice me. That is how matters stood.

Next day there was a good deal of talk about a telegram which, four
days ago, had been sent to St. Petersburg, but to which there had come
no answer. The General was visibly disturbed and moody, for the matter
concerned his mother. The Frenchman, too, was excited, and after dinner
the whole party talked long and seriously together--the Frenchman's
tone being extraordinarily presumptuous and offhand to everybody. It
almost reminded one of the proverb, "Invite a man to your table, and
soon he will place his feet upon it." Even to Polina he was brusque
almost to the point of rudeness. Yet still he seemed glad to join us in
our walks in the Casino, or in our rides and drives about the town. I
had long been aware of certain circumstances which bound the General to
him; I had long been aware that in Russia they had hatched some scheme
together although I did not know whether the plot had come to anything,
or whether it was still only in the stage of being talked of. Likewise
I was aware, in part, of a family secret--namely, that, last year, the
Frenchman had bailed the General out of debt, and given him 30,000
roubles wherewith to pay his Treasury dues on retiring from the
service. And now, of course, the General was in a vice--although the
chief part in the affair was being played by Mlle. Blanche. Yes, of
this last I had no doubt.

But WHO was this Mlle. Blanche? It was said of her that she was a
Frenchwoman of good birth who, living with her mother, possessed a
colossal fortune. It was also said that she was some relation to the
Marquis, but only a distant one a cousin, or cousin-german, or
something of the sort. Likewise I knew that, up to the time of my
journey to Paris, she and the Frenchman had been more ceremonious
towards our party--they had stood on a much more precise and delicate
footing with them; but that now their acquaintanceship--their
friendship, their intimacy--had taken on a much more off-hand and
rough-and-ready air. Perhaps they thought that our means were too
modest for them, and, therefore, unworthy of politeness or reticence.
Also, for the last three days I had noticed certain looks which Astley
had kept throwing at Mlle. Blanche and her mother; and it had occurred
to me that he must have had some previous acquaintance with the pair. I
had even surmised that the Frenchman too must have met Mr. Astley
before. Astley was a man so shy, reserved, and taciturn in his manner
that one might have looked for anything from him. At all events the
Frenchman accorded him only the slightest of greetings, and scarcely
even looked at him. Certainly he did not seem to be afraid of him;
which was intelligible enough. But why did Mlle. Blanche also never
look at the Englishman?--particularly since, a propos of something or
another, the Marquis had declared the Englishman to be immensely and
indubitably rich? Was not that a sufficient reason to make Mlle.
Blanche look at the Englishman? Anyway the General seemed extremely
uneasy; and, one could well understand what a telegram to announce the
death of his mother would mean for him!

Although I thought it probable that Polina was avoiding me for a
definite reason, I adopted a cold and indifferent air; for I felt
pretty certain that it would not be long before she herself approached
me. For two days, therefore, I devoted my attention to Mlle. Blanche.
The poor General was in despair! To fall in love at fifty-five, and
with such vehemence, is indeed a misfortune! And add to that his
widowerhood, his children, his ruined property, his debts, and the
woman with whom he had fallen in love! Though Mlle. Blanche was
extremely good-looking, I may or may not be understood when I say that
she had one of those faces which one is afraid of. At all events, I
myself have always feared such women. Apparently about twenty-five
years of age, she was tall and broad-shouldered, with shoulders that
sloped; yet though her neck and bosom were ample in their proportions,
her skin was dull yellow in colour, while her hair (which was extremely
abundant--sufficient to make two coiffures) was as black as Indian ink.
Add to that a pair of black eyes with yellowish whites, a proud glance,
gleaming teeth, and lips which were perennially pomaded and redolent of
musk. As for her dress, it was invariably rich, effective, and chic,
yet in good taste. Lastly, her feet and hands were astonishing, and her
voice a deep contralto. Sometimes, when she laughed, she displayed her
teeth, but at ordinary times her air was taciturn and
haughty--especially in the presence of Polina and Maria Philipovna. Yet
she seemed to me almost destitute of education, and even of wits,
though cunning and suspicious. This, apparently, was not because her
life had been lacking in incident. Perhaps, if all were known, the
Marquis was not her kinsman at all, nor her mother, her mother; but
there was evidence that, in Berlin, where we had first come across the
pair, they had possessed acquaintances of good standing. As for the
Marquis himself, I doubt to this day if he was a Marquis--although
about the fact that he had formerly belonged to high society (for
instance, in Moscow and Germany) there could be no doubt whatever. What
he had formerly been in France I had not a notion. All I knew was that
he was said to possess a chateau. During the last two weeks I had
looked for much to transpire, but am still ignorant whether at that
time anything decisive ever passed between Mademoiselle and the
General. Everything seemed to depend upon our means--upon whether the
General would be able to flourish sufficient money in her face. If ever
the news should arrive that the grandmother was not dead, Mlle.
Blanche, I felt sure, would disappear in a twinkling. Indeed, it
surprised and amused me to observe what a passion for intrigue I was
developing. But how I loathed it all! With what pleasure would I have
given everybody and everything the go-by! Only--I could not leave
Polina. How, then, could I show contempt for those who surrounded her?
Espionage is a base thing, but--what have I to do with that?

Mr. Astley, too, I found a curious person. I was only sure that he had
fallen in love with Polina. A remarkable and diverting circumstance is
the amount which may lie in the mien of a shy and painfully modest man
who has been touched with the divine passion--especially when he would
rather sink into the earth than betray himself by a single word or
look. Though Mr. Astley frequently met us when we were out walking, he
would merely take off his hat and pass us by, though I knew he was
dying to join us. Even when invited to do so, he would refuse. Again,
in places of amusement--in the Casino, at concerts, or near the
fountain--he was never far from the spot where we were sitting. In
fact, WHEREVER we were in the Park, in the forest, or on the
Shlangenberg--one needed but to raise one's eyes and glance around to
catch sight of at least a PORTION of Mr. Astley's frame sticking
out--whether on an adjacent path or behind a bush. Yet never did he
lose any chance of speaking to myself; and, one morning when we had
met, and exchanged a couple of words, he burst out in his usual abrupt
way, without saying "Good-morning."

"That Mlle. Blanche," he said. "Well, I have seen a good many women
like her."

After that he was silent as he looked me meaningly in the face. What he
meant I did not know, but to my glance of inquiry he returned only a
dry nod, and a reiterated "It is so." Presently, however, he resumed:

"Does Mlle. Polina like flowers?"

"I really cannot say," was my reply.

"What? You cannot say?" he cried in great astonishment.

"No; I have never noticed whether she does so or not," I repeated with
a smile.

"Hm! Then I have an idea in my mind," he concluded. Lastly, with a nod,
he walked away with a pleased expression on his face. The conversation
had been carried on in execrable French.



IV

Today has been a day of folly, stupidity, and ineptness. The time is
now eleven o'clock in the evening, and I am sitting in my room and
thinking. It all began, this morning, with my being forced to go and
play roulette for Polina Alexandrovna. When she handed me over her
store of six hundred gulden I exacted two conditions--namely, that I
should not go halves with her in her winnings, if any (that is to say,
I should not take anything for myself), and that she should explain to
me, that same evening, why it was so necessary for her to win, and how
much was the sum which she needed. For, I could not suppose that she
was doing all this merely for the sake of money. Yet clearly she did
need some money, and that as soon as possible, and for a special
purpose. Well, she promised to explain matters, and I departed. There
was a tremendous crowd in the gaming-rooms. What an arrogant, greedy
crowd it was! I pressed forward towards the middle of the room until I
had secured a seat at a croupier's elbow. Then I began to play in timid
fashion, venturing only twenty or thirty gulden at a time. Meanwhile, I
observed and took notes. It seemed to me that calculation was
superfluous, and by no means possessed of the importance which certain
other players attached to it, even though they sat with ruled papers in
their hands, whereon they set down the coups, calculated the chances,
reckoned, staked, and--lost exactly as we more simple mortals did who
played without any reckoning at all.

However, I deduced from the scene one conclusion which seemed to me
reliable--namely, that in the flow of fortuitous chances there is, if
not a system, at all events a sort of order. This, of course, is a very
strange thing. For instance, after a dozen middle figures there would
always occur a dozen or so outer ones. Suppose the ball stopped twice
at a dozen outer figures; it would then pass to a dozen of the first
ones, and then, again, to a dozen of the middle ciphers, and fall upon
them three or four times, and then revert to a dozen outers; whence,
after another couple of rounds, the ball would again pass to the first
figures, strike upon them once, and then return thrice to the middle
series--continuing thus for an hour and a half, or two hours. One,
three, two: one, three, two. It was all very curious. Again, for the
whole of a day or a morning the red would alternate with the black, but
almost without any order, and from moment to moment, so that scarcely
two consecutive rounds would end upon either the one or the other. Yet,
next day, or, perhaps, the next evening, the red alone would turn up,
and attain a run of over two score, and continue so for quite a length
of time--say, for a whole day. Of these circumstances the majority were
pointed out to me by Mr. Astley, who stood by the gaming-table the
whole morning, yet never once staked in person.

For myself, I lost all that I had on me, and with great speed. To begin
with, I staked two hundred gulden on "even," and won. Then I staked the
same amount again, and won: and so on some two or three times. At one
moment I must have had in my hands--gathered there within a space of
five minutes--about 4000 gulden. That, of course, was the proper moment
for me to have departed, but there arose in me a strange sensation as
of a challenge to Fate--as of a wish to deal her a blow on the cheek,
and to put out my tongue at her. Accordingly I set down the largest
stake allowed by the rules--namely, 4000 gulden--and lost. Fired by
this mishap, I pulled out all the money left to me, staked it all on
the same venture, and--again lost! Then I rose from the table, feeling
as though I were stupefied. What had happened to me I did not know;
but, before luncheon I told Polina of my losses--until which time I
walked about the Park.

At luncheon I was as excited as I had been at the meal three days ago.
Mlle. Blanche and the Frenchman were lunching with us, and it appeared
that the former had been to the Casino that morning, and had seen my
exploits there. So now she showed me more attention when talking to me;
while, for his part, the Frenchman approached me, and asked outright if
it had been my own money that I had lost. He appeared to be suspicious
as to something being on foot between Polina and myself, but I merely
fired up, and replied that the money had been all my own.

At this the General seemed extremely surprised, and asked me whence I
had procured it; whereupon I replied that, though I had begun only with
100 gulden, six or seven rounds had increased my capital to 5000 or
6000 gulden, and that subsequently I had lost the whole in two rounds.

All this, of course, was plausible enough. During my recital I glanced
at Polina, but nothing was to be discerned on her face. However, she
had allowed me to fire up without correcting me, and from that I
concluded that it was my cue to fire up, and to conceal the fact that I
had been playing on her behalf. "At all events," I thought to myself,
"she, in her turn, has promised to give me an explanation to-night, and
to reveal to me something or another."

Although the General appeared to be taking stock of me, he said
nothing. Yet I could see uneasiness and annoyance in his face. Perhaps
his straitened circumstances made it hard for him to have to hear of
piles of gold passing through the hands of an irresponsible fool like
myself within the space of a quarter of an hour. Now, I have an idea
that, last night, he and the Frenchman had a sharp encounter with one
another. At all events they closeted themselves together, and then had
a long and vehement discussion; after which the Frenchman departed in
what appeared to be a passion, but returned, early this morning, to
renew the combat. On hearing of my losses, however, he only remarked
with a sharp, and even a malicious, air that "a man ought to go more
carefully." Next, for some reason or another, he added that, "though a
great many Russians go in for gambling, they are no good at the game."

"I think that roulette was devised specially for Russians," I retorted;
and when the Frenchman smiled contemptuously at my reply I further
remarked that I was sure I was right; also that, speaking of Russians
in the capacity of gamblers, I had far more blame for them than
praise--of that he could be quite sure.

"Upon what do you base your opinion?" he inquired.

"Upon the fact that to the virtues and merits of the civilised
Westerner there has become historically added--though this is not his
chief point--a capacity for acquiring capital; whereas, not only is the
Russian incapable of acquiring capital, but also he exhausts it
wantonly and of sheer folly. None the less we Russians often need
money; wherefore, we are glad of, and greatly devoted to, a method of
acquisition like roulette--whereby, in a couple of hours, one may grow
rich without doing any work. This method, I repeat, has a great
attraction for us, but since we play in wanton fashion, and without
taking any trouble, we almost invariably lose."

"To a certain extent that is true," assented the Frenchman with a
self-satisfied air.

"Oh no, it is not true," put in the General sternly. "And you," he
added to me, "you ought to be ashamed of yourself for traducing your
own country!"

"I beg pardon," I said. "Yet it would be difficult to say which is the
worst of the two--Russian ineptitude or the German method of growing
rich through honest toil."

"What an extraordinary idea," cried the General.

"And what a RUSSIAN idea!" added the Frenchman.

I smiled, for I was rather glad to have a quarrel with them.

"I would rather live a wandering life in tents," I cried, "than bow the
knee to a German idol!"

"To WHAT idol?" exclaimed the General, now seriously angry.

"To the German method of heaping up riches. I have not been here very
long, but I can tell you that what I have seen and verified makes my
Tartar blood boil. Good Lord! I wish for no virtues of that kind.
Yesterday I went for a walk of about ten versts; and, everywhere I
found that things were even as we read of them in good German
picture-books--that every house has its 'Fater,' who is horribly
beneficent and extraordinarily honourable. So honourable is he that it
is dreadful to have anything to do with him; and I cannot bear people
of that sort. Each such 'Fater' has his family, and in the evenings
they read improving books aloud. Over their roof-trees there murmur
elms and chestnuts; the sun has sunk to his rest; a stork is roosting
on the gable; and all is beautifully poetic and touching. Do not be
angry, General. Let me tell you something that is even more touching
than that. I can remember how, of an evening, my own father, now dead,
used to sit under the lime trees in his little garden, and to read
books aloud to myself and my mother. Yes, I know how things ought to be
done. Yet every German family is bound to slavery and to submission to
its 'Fater.' They work like oxen, and amass wealth like Jews. Suppose
the 'Fater' has put by a certain number of gulden which he hands over
to his eldest son, in order that the said son may acquire a trade or a
small plot of land. Well, one result is to deprive the daughter of a
dowry, and so leave her among the unwedded. For the same reason, the
parents will have to sell the younger son into bondage or the ranks of
the army, in order that he may earn more towards the family capital.
Yes, such things ARE done, for I have been making inquiries on the
subject. It is all done out of sheer rectitude--out of a rectitude
which is magnified to the point of the younger son believing that he
has been RIGHTLY sold, and that it is simply idyllic for the victim to
rejoice when he is made over into pledge. What more have I to tell?
Well, this--that matters bear just as hardly upon the eldest son.
Perhaps he has his Gretchen to whom his heart is bound; but he cannot
marry her, for the reason that he has not yet amassed sufficient
gulden. So, the pair wait on in a mood of sincere and virtuous
expectation, and smilingly deposit themselves in pawn the while.
Gretchen's cheeks grow sunken, and she begins to wither; until at last,
after some twenty years, their substance has multiplied, and sufficient
gulden have been honourably and virtuously accumulated. Then the
'Fater' blesses his forty-year-old heir and the thirty-five-year-old
Gretchen with the sunken bosom and the scarlet nose; after which he
bursts, into tears, reads the pair a lesson on morality, and dies. In
turn the eldest son becomes a virtuous 'Fater,' and the old story
begins again. In fifty or sixty years' time the grandson of the
original 'Fater' will have amassed a considerable sum; and that sum he
will hand over to, his son, and the latter to HIS son, and so on for
several generations; until at length there will issue a Baron
Rothschild, or a 'Hoppe and Company,' or the devil knows what! Is it
not a beautiful spectacle--the spectacle of a century or two of
inherited labour, patience, intellect, rectitude, character,
perseverance, and calculation, with a stork sitting on the roof above
it all? What is more; they think there can never be anything better
than this; wherefore, from their point of view they begin to judge the
rest of the world, and to censure all who are at fault--that is to say,
who are not exactly like themselves. Yes, there you have it in a
nutshell. For my own part, I would rather grow fat after the Russian
manner, or squander my whole substance at roulette. I have no wish to
be 'Hoppe and Company' at the end of five generations. I want the money
for MYSELF, for in no way do I look upon my personality as necessary
to, or meet to be given over to, capital. I may be wrong, but there you
have it. Those are MY views."

"How far you may be right in what you have said I do not know,"
remarked the General moodily; "but I DO know that you are becoming an
insufferable farceur whenever you are given the least chance."

As usual, he left his sentence unfinished. Indeed, whenever he embarked
upon anything that in the least exceeded the limits of daily
small-talk, he left unfinished what he was saying. The Frenchman had
listened to me contemptuously, with a slight protruding of his eyes;
but, he could not have understood very much of my harangue. As for
Polina, she had looked on with serene indifference. She seemed to have
heard neither my voice nor any other during the progress of the meal.



V

Yes, she had been extraordinarily meditative. Yet, on leaving the
table, she immediately ordered me to accompany her for a walk. We took
the children with us, and set out for the fountain in the Park.

I was in such an irritated frame of mind that in rude and abrupt
fashion I blurted out a question as to "why our Marquis de Griers had
ceased to accompany her for strolls, or to speak to her for days
together."

"Because he is a brute," she replied in rather a curious way. It was
the first time that I had heard her speak so of De Griers:
consequently, I was momentarily awed into silence by this expression of
resentment.

"Have you noticed, too, that today he is by no means on good terms with
the General?" I went on.

"Yes--and I suppose you want to know why," she replied with dry
captiousness. "You are aware, are you not, that the General is
mortgaged to the Marquis, with all his property? Consequently, if the
General's mother does not die, the Frenchman will become the absolute
possessor of everything which he now holds only in pledge."

"Then it is really the case that everything is mortgaged? I have heard
rumours to that effect, but was unaware how far they might be true."

"Yes, they ARE true. What then?"

"Why, it will be a case of 'Farewell, Mlle. Blanche,'" I remarked; "for
in such an event she would never become Madame General. Do you know, I
believe the old man is so much in love with her that he will shoot
himself if she should throw him over. At his age it is a dangerous
thing to fall in love."

"Yes, something, I believe, WILL happen to him," assented Polina
thoughtfully.

"And what a fine thing it all is!" I continued. "Could anything be more
abominable than the way in which she has agreed to marry for money
alone? Not one of the decencies has been observed; the whole affair has
taken place without the least ceremony. And as for the grandmother,
what could be more comical, yet more dastardly, than the sending of
telegram after telegram to know if she is dead? What do you think of
it, Polina Alexandrovna?"

"Yes, it is very horrible," she interrupted with a shudder.
"Consequently, I am the more surprised that YOU should be so cheerful.
What are YOU so pleased about? About the fact that you have gone and
lost my money?"

"What? The money that you gave me to lose? I told you I should never
win for other people--least of all for you. I obeyed you simply because
you ordered me to; but you must not blame me for the result. I warned
you that no good would ever come of it. You seem much depressed at
having lost your money. Why do you need it so greatly?"

"Why do YOU ask me these questions?"

"Because you promised to explain matters to me. Listen. I am certain
that, as soon as ever I 'begin to play for myself' (and I still have
120 gulden left), I shall win. You can then take of me what you
require."

She made a contemptuous grimace.

"You must not be angry with me," I continued, "for making such a
proposal. I am so conscious of being only a nonentity in your eyes that
you need not mind accepting money from me. A gift from me could not
possibly offend you. Moreover, it was I who lost your gulden."

She glanced at me, but, seeing that I was in an irritable, sarcastic
mood, changed the subject.

"My affairs cannot possibly interest you," she said. "Still, if you DO
wish to know, I am in debt. I borrowed some money, and must pay it back
again. I have a curious, senseless idea that I am bound to win at the
gaming-tables. Why I think so I cannot tell, but I do think so, and
with some assurance. Perhaps it is because of that assurance that I now
find myself without any other resource."

"Or perhaps it is because it is so NECESSARY for you to win. It is like
a drowning man catching at a straw. You yourself will agree that,
unless he were drowning he would not mistake a straw for the trunk of a
tree."

Polina looked surprised.

"What?" she said. "Do not you also hope something from it? Did you not
tell me again and again, two weeks ago, that you were certain of
winning at roulette if you played here? And did you not ask me not to
consider you a fool for doing so? Were you joking? You cannot have
been, for I remember that you spoke with a gravity which forbade the
idea of your jesting."

"True," I replied gloomily. "I always felt certain that I should win.
Indeed, what you say makes me ask myself--Why have my absurd, senseless
losses of today raised a doubt in my mind? Yet I am still positive
that, so soon as ever I begin to play for myself, I shall infallibly
win."

"And why are you so certain?"

"To tell the truth, I do not know. I only know that I must win--that it
is the one resource I have left. Yes, why do I feel so assured on the
point?"

"Perhaps because one cannot help winning if one is fanatically certain
of doing so."

"Yet I dare wager that you do not think me capable of serious feeling
in the matter?"

"I do not care whether you are so or not," answered Polina with calm
indifference. "Well, since you ask me, I DO doubt your ability to take
anything seriously. You are capable of worrying, but not deeply. You
are too ill-regulated and unsettled a person for that. But why do you
want money? Not a single one of the reasons which you have given can be
looked upon as serious."

"By the way," I interrupted, "you say you want to pay off a debt. It
must be a large one. Is it to the Frenchman?"

"What do you mean by asking all these questions? You are very clever
today. Surely you are not drunk?"

"You know that you and I stand on no ceremony, and that sometimes I put
to you very plain questions. I repeat that I am your slave--and slaves
cannot be shamed or offended."

"You talk like a child. It is always possible to comport oneself with
dignity. If one has a quarrel it ought to elevate rather than to
degrade one."

"A maxim straight from the copybook! Suppose I CANNOT comport myself
with dignity. By that I mean that, though I am a man of self-respect, I
am unable to carry off a situation properly. Do you know the reason? It
is because we Russians are too richly and multifariously gifted to be
able at once to find the proper mode of expression. It is all a
question of mode. Most of us are so bounteously endowed with intellect
as to require also a spice of genius to choose the right form of
behaviour. And genius is lacking in us for the reason that so little
genius at all exists. It belongs only to the French--though a few other
Europeans have elaborated their forms so well as to be able to figure
with extreme dignity, and yet be wholly undignified persons. That is
why, with us, the mode is so all-important. The Frenchman may receive
an insult--a real, a venomous insult: yet, he will not so much as
frown. But a tweaking of the nose he cannot bear, for the reason that
such an act is an infringement of the accepted, of the time-hallowed
order of decorum. That is why our good ladies are so fond of
Frenchmen--the Frenchman's manners, they say, are perfect! But in my
opinion there is no such thing as a Frenchman's manners. The Frenchman
is only a bird--the coq gaulois. At the same time, as I am not a woman,
I do not properly understand the question. Cocks may be excellent
birds.  If I am wrong you must stop me. You ought to stop and correct
me more often when I am speaking to you, for I am too apt to say
everything that is in my head.

