"Do you wish to make acquaintance?" asked the prince.

"Ah!" said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around
it. "Got any money?" he asked, suddenly.

"Not much."

"How much?"

"Twenty-five roubles."

"Let's see it."

The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The
latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and
examined the other side; then he held it up to the light.

"How strange that it should have browned so," he said, reflectively.
"These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way, while
other notes often grow paler. Take it."

The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.

"I came here to warn you," he said. "In the first place, don't lend me
any money, for I shall certainly ask you to."

"Very well."

"Shall you pay here?"

"Yes, I intend to."

"Oh! I _don't_ intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you
noticed a room, did you? Don't come to me very often; I shall see you
here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?"

"No."

"Nor heard him?"

"No; of course not."

"Well, you'll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money
from me. _Avis au lecteur._ Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly
live with a name like Ferdishenko?"

"Why not?"

"Good-bye."

And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman
made it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but
that it did not as a rule "come off." He even produced a bad impression
on some people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways
for all that.

As he went out of the prince's room, he collided with yet another
visitor coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several
warning gestures to the prince from behind the new arrival's back, and
left the room in conscious pride.

This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with
greyish hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their
sockets. His appearance would have been distinguished had it not been
that he gave the idea of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old
coat, and he smelled of vodka when he came near. His walk was effective,
and he clearly did his best to appear dignified, and to impress people
by his manner.

This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most
courteous smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he
examined the prince's features as though searching for familiar traits
therein.

"'Tis he, 'tis he!" he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity.
"As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name-the
dear familiar name--and, oh! how it reminded me of the irrevocable
past--Prince Muishkin, I believe?"

"Exactly so."

"General Ivolgin--retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and
generic names?"

"Lef Nicolaievitch."

"So, so--the son of my old, I may say my childhood's friend, Nicolai
Petrovitch."

"My father's name was Nicolai Lvovitch."

"Lvovitch," repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with
perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the
least in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat
down, and taking the prince's hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.

"I carried you in my arms as a baby," he observed.

"Really?" asked the prince. "Why, it's twenty years since my father
died."

"Yes, yes--twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I
went straight into the army, and he--"

"My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment."

"No, sir--in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before
his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother--" The general paused, as though overcome with
emotion.

"She died a few months later, from a cold," said the prince.

"Oh, not cold--believe an old man--not from a cold, but from grief for
her prince. Oh--your mother, your mother! heigh-ho! Youth--youth! Your
father and I--old friends as we were--nearly murdered each other for her
sake."

The prince began to be a little incredulous.

"I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged--engaged to my
friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me
at seven o'clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on
both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his
pocket--across a handkerchief--without witnesses. Why invite witnesses
when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of minutes? The
pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand opposite one
another. We aim the pistols at each other's hearts. Suddenly tears start
to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace--the battle is one of
self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, 'She is yours;' I cry, 'She is
yours--' in a word, in a word--You've come to live with us, hey?"

"Yes--yes--for a while, I think," stammered the prince.

"Prince, mother begs you to come to her," said Colia, appearing at the
door.

The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a
friendly manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.

"As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you,"
he began. "I have suffered--there was a catastrophe. I suffered without
a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent
woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we are
poor--a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us--for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have _you_, at all
events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house."

The prince looked inquiringly at the other.

"Yes, a marriage is being arranged--a marriage between a questionable
woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to bring this
woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while I
live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the
threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly
talk to Gania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this
beforehand, but you cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of my
old friend, and I hope--"

"Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawing-room,"
said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.

"Imagine, my dear," cried the general, "it turns out that I have nursed
the prince on my knee in the old days." His wife looked searchingly at
him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince rose and
followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general.
She immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have
observed this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he
was in high good humour.

"A son of my old friend, dear," he cried; "surely you must remember
Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at--at Tver."

"I don't remember any Nicolai Lvovitch. Was that your father?" she
inquired of the prince.

"Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver," said the prince,
rather timidly. "So Pavlicheff told me."

"No, Tver," insisted the general; "he removed just before his death. You
were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an excellent
fellow, may have made a mistake."

"You knew Pavlicheff then?"

"Oh, yes--a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my
blessing."

"My father was just about to be tried when he died," said the prince,
"although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital."

"Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted."

"Yes? Do you know that for a fact?" asked the prince, whose curiosity
was aroused by the general's words.

"I should think so indeed!" cried the latter. "The court-martial came to
no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might say!
Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command
was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to
sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince--you understand
that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and
a corporal--the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have
him flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on
a camp bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite
understand? It was, as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair.
In due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince wrote his report, the
deceased's name was removed from the roll. All as it should be, is it
not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second battalion
of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had happened!"

"What?" said the prince, much astonished.

"It did not occur--it's a mistake!" said Nina Alexandrovna quickly,
looking, at the prince rather anxiously. "_Mon mari se trompe_," she
added, speaking in French.

"My dear, '_se trompe_' is easily said. Do you remember any case at all
like it? Everybody was at their wits' end. I should be the first to say
'_qu'on se trompe_,' but unfortunately I was an eye-witness, and was also
on the commission of inquiry. Everything proved that it was really he,
the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been given the usual military
funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a most curious
case--nearly an impossible one. I recognize that... but--"

"Father, your dinner is ready," said Varvara at this point, putting her
head in at the door.

"Very glad, I'm particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence--almost a psychological--"

"Your soup'll be cold; do come."

"Coming, coming," said the general. "Son of my old friend--" he was
heard muttering as he went down the passage.

"You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us,"
said Nina Alexandrovna; "but he will not disturb you often. He dines
alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at.
One thing I must beg of you--if my husband applies to you for payment
for board and lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of course
anything paid by you to the general would be as fully settled as if
paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, if you
please, for convenience' sake. What is it, Varia?"

Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.

Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing
at it long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.

"It's a present from herself to him," said Varia; "the question is to be
finally decided this evening."

"This evening!" repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly,
as though to herself. "Then it's all settled, of course, and there's no
hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her
portrait. Did he show it you himself?" she added, in some surprise.

"You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month. Ptitsin
told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I
picked it up."

"Prince," asked Nina Alexandrovna, "I wanted to inquire whether you have
known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today from
somewhere."

The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving
out the greater part. The two ladies listened intently.

"I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity," said the elder, at last.
"I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just now
that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?"

At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated
next to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait
of Nastasia Philipovna remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania
observed it there, and with a frown of annoyance snatched it up and
threw it across to his writing-table, which stood at the other end of
the room.

"Is it today, Gania?" asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.

"Is what today?" cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself,
he turned sharply on the prince. "Oh," he growled, "I see, you are here,
that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can't hold your
tongue? Look here, understand once for all, prince--"

"I am to blame in this, Gania--no one else," said Ptitsin.

Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.

"It's better so, you know, Gania--especially as, from one point of view,
the matter may be considered as settled," said Ptitsin; and sitting
down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered with
pencil writing.

Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of
apologizing to the prince, however.

"If it's all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right," said
Nina Alexandrovna. "Don't frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania;
I shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me anything you don't
like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your will." She said all
this, knitting away the while as though perfectly calm and composed.

Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his
mother, hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina
Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:

"You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may
be quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions--not
from my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you
know that. I have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be
with you, whether we remain united, or whether we part. Of course I only
answer for myself--you can hardly expect your sister--"

"My sister again," cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost
hate. "Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall
always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold."

Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost
affectionately.

"I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not
for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time!
They say it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?"

"She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not," replied Gania.

"We have been silent on this subject for three weeks," said his mother,
"and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How can
she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do
not love her? How can such a--such a--"

"Practised hand--eh?"

"I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind her?"

Nina Alexandrovna's question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a
moment and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony of
his tone:

"There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by promising
that there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or questions, and
here you are beginning them at once. We had better drop the subject--we
had, really. I shall never leave you, mother; any other man would cut
and run from such a sister as this. See how she is looking at me at this
moment! Besides, how do you know that I am blinding Nastasia Philipovna?
As for Varia, I don't care--she can do just as she pleases. There,
that's quite enough!"

Gania's irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked up
and down the room. These conversations always touched the family sores
before long.

"I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall
keep my word," remarked Varia.

"Out of obstinacy" shouted Gania. "You haven't married, either, thanks
to your obstinacy. Oh, you needn't frown at me, Varvara! You can go at
once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, you are
going to leave us are you, too?" he cried, turning to the prince, who
was rising from his chair.

Gania's voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable
irritation.

The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in
Gania's expression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the
cup overflow, he changed his mind and left the room without a word.
A few minutes later he was aware from the noisy voices in the drawing
room, that the conversation had become more quarrelsome than ever after
his departure.

He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the
corridor into his own room. As he came near the front door he heard
someone outside vainly endeavouring to ring the bell, which was
evidently broken, and only shook a little, without emitting any sound.

The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in
amazement--for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from
her photograph. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She
quickly pushed by him into the hall, shouldering him out of her way, and
said, furiously, as she threw off her fur cloak:

"If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in
the hall to let people in when they rattle the bell handle. There, now,
you've dropped my fur cloak--dummy!"

Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it
off her towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince
had missed it.

"Now then--announce me, quick!"

The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished
that he could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with
the cloak over his arm.

"Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad?"

The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she burst
out laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as yet. At
first, when he had opened the door and saw her standing before him, he
had become as pale as death; but now the red blood had rushed back to
his cheeks in a torrent.

"Why, what an idiot it is!" cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with
irritation. "Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?"

"Nastasia Philipovna," murmured the prince.

"And how do you know that?" she asked him, sharply.

"I have never seen you before!"

"Go on, announce me--what's that noise?"

"They are quarrelling," said the prince, and entered the drawing-room,
just as matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina Alexandrovna
had forgotten that she had "submitted to everything!" She was defending
Varia. Ptitsin was taking her part, too. Not that Varia was afraid of
standing up for herself. She was by no means that sort of a girl; but
her brother was becoming ruder and more intolerable every moment. Her
usual practice in such cases as the present was to say nothing, but
stare at him, without taking her eyes off his face for an instant. This
manoeuvre, as she well knew, could drive Gania distracted.

Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:

"Nastasia Philipovna!"

IX.

Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as though
they neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was motionless
with horror.

Nastasia's arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all
parties. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she
had been so haughty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce her
to his parents. Of late she had not so much as mentioned them. Gania was
partly glad of this; but still he had put it to her debit in the account
to be settled after marriage.

He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one
thing seemed to him quite clear-her visit now, and the present of her
portrait on this particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way
she intended to make her decision!

The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not
last long, for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in,
pushing by the prince again.

"At last I've stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your bell?" she
said, merrily, as she pressed Gania's hand, the latter having rushed
up to her as soon as she made her appearance. "What are you looking so
upset about? Introduce me, please!"

The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women,
before shaking hands, exchanged looks of strange import. Nastasia,
however, smiled amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and kept
her gloomy expression. She did not even vouchsafe the usual courteous
smile of etiquette. Gania darted a terrible glance of wrath at her
for this, but Nina Alexandrovna mended matters a little when Gania
introduced her at last. Hardly, however, had the old lady begun about
her "highly gratified feelings," and so on, when Nastasia left her, and
flounced into a chair by Gania's side in the corner by the window, and
cried: "Where's your study? and where are the--the lodgers? You do take
in lodgers, don't you?"

Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply,
but Nastasia interrupted him:

"Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don't you use
a study? Does this sort of thing pay?" she added, turning to Nina
Alexandrovna.

"Well, it is troublesome, rather," said the latter; "but I suppose it
will 'pay' pretty well. We have only just begun, however--"

Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at
Gania, and cried, laughing, "What a face! My goodness, what a face you
have on at this moment!"

Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment
and his alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now
twitched with rage as he continued to stare evilly at his laughing
guest, while his countenance became absolutely livid.

There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless
and bewildered himself, still managed to remark Gania's death-like
pallor, and the dreadful change that had come over his face. This
witness was the prince, who now advanced in alarm and muttered to Gania:

"Drink some water, and don't look like that!"

It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on
the spur of the moment. But his speech was productive of much--for
it appeared that all Gania's rage now overflowed upon the prince. He
seized him by the shoulder and gazed with an intensity of loathing and
revenge at him, but said nothing--as though his feelings were too strong
to permit of words.

General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of
anxiety; Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko
stood stock still at the door in amazement;--only Varia remained coolly
watching the scene from under her eyelashes. She did not sit down,
but stood by her mother with folded hands. However, Gania recollected
himself almost immediately. He let go of the prince and burst out
laughing.

"Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?" he asked, as naturally as
possible. "I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let
me introduce this interesting character to you--though I have only known
him myself since the morning."

Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. "Prince? He a Prince? Why,
I took him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce me!
Ha, ha, ha, isn't that good!"

"Not bad that, not bad at all!" put in Ferdishenko, "_se non è vero_--"

"I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn't I? Forgive me--do! Who
is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?" she added, addressing Gania.

"He is a lodger of ours," explained the latter.

"An idiot!"--the prince distinctly heard the word half whispered from
behind him. This was Ferdishenko's voluntary information for Nastasia's
benefit.

"Tell me, why didn't you put me right when I made such a dreadful
mistake just now?" continued the latter, examining the prince from head
to foot without the slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as though
convinced that it would be so foolish that she must inevitably fail to
restrain her laughter over it.

"I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly--" murmured the prince.

"How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were
you so struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming
about me?"

"Oho! ho, ho, ho!" cried Ferdishenko. "_Now_ then, prince! My word,
what things I would say if I had such a chance as that! My goodness,
prince--go on!"

"So should I, in your place, I've no doubt!" laughed the prince to
Ferdishenko; then continued, addressing Nastasia: "Your portrait struck
me very forcibly this morning; then I was talking about you to the
Epanchins; and then, in the train, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen
Rogojin told me a good deal about you; and at the very moment that I
opened the door to you I happened to be thinking of you, when--there you
stood before me!"

"And how did you recognize me?"

"From the portrait!"

"What else?"

"I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are--I seemed to have seen you
somewhere."

"Where--where?"

"I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not
seen you--I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I don't
know."

The prince said all this with manifest effort--in broken sentences, and
with many drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia
Philipovna looked at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.

"Bravo, prince!" cried Ferdishenko, delighted.

At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the
prince and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and
before them stood the head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was
dressed in evening clothes; his moustache was dyed.

This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to
morbidness, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and
was seeking feverishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a more
presentable kind of existence. At home, he now adopted an attitude
of absolute cynicism, but he could not keep this up before Nastasia
Philipovna, although he had sworn to make her pay after marriage for all
he suffered now. He was experiencing a last humiliation, the bitterest
of all, at this moment--the humiliation of blushing for his own kindred
in his own house. A question flashed through his mind as to whether the
game was really worth the candle.

For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his
nightmare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame--the meeting
between his father and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to
imagine such an event, but had found the picture too mortifying and
exasperating, and had quietly dropped it. Very likely he anticipated
far worse things than was at all necessary; it is often so with vain
persons. He had long since determined, therefore, to get his father
out of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in order to avoid such
a meeting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he had been so
overwhelmed with astonishment, that he had not thought of his father,
and had made no arrangements to keep him out of the way. And now it was
too late--there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and white tie,
and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family
circle; of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she
come for? There were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and
she seemed to have forgotten their very existence already; and if she
behaved like that, he thought, she must have some object in view.

Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.

"Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin," said the smiling general, with a low
bow of great dignity, "an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father
of this family; but happy in the hope of including in that family so
exquisite--"

He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed
a chair up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs,
at this post-prandial hour, flopped into it backwards. It was always a
difficult thing to put this warrior to confusion, and his sudden
descent left him as composed as before. He had sat down just opposite to
Nastasia, whose fingers he now took, and raised to his lips with great
elegance, and much courtesy. The general had once belonged to a very
select circle of society, but he had been turned out of it two or three
years since on account of certain weaknesses, in which he now indulged
with all the less restraint; but his good manners remained with him to
this day, in spite of all.

Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest
arrival, of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.

"I have heard that my son--" began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

"Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! _You_ might have come to see me
anyhow, without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your
son hide you?"

"The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents--" began the
general, again.

"Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment?
Someone is inquiring for him," said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice,
interrupting the conversation.

"Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that. Why,
what business can he have? He has retired, hasn't he? You won't leave
me, general, will you?"

"I give you my word that he shall come and see you--but he--he needs
rest just now."

"General, they say you require rest," said Nastasia Philipovna, with the
melancholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.

Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish
position a great deal worse.

"My dear, my dear!" he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at his
wife, with one hand on his heart.

"Won't you leave the room, mamma?" asked Varia, aloud.

"No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end."

Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity
was not in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase. She
immediately overwhelmed the general once more with questions, and within
five minutes that gentleman was as happy as a king, and holding forth at
the top of his voice, amid the laughter of almost all who heard him.

Colia jogged the prince's arm.

"Can't _you_ get him out of the room, somehow? _Do_, please," and tears
of annoyance stood in the boy's eyes. "Curse that Gania!" he muttered,
between his teeth.

"Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well," General Ivolgin was saying at
this moment; "he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin--whose son I
have this day embraced after an absence of twenty years--and I,
were three inseparables. Alas one is in the grave, torn to pieces by
calumnies and bullets; another is now before you, still battling with
calumnies and bullets--"

"Bullets?" cried Nastasia.

"Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I feel
them in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio, Epanchin, of
course after that little affair with the poodle in the railway carriage,
it was all _up_ between us."

"Poodle? What was that? And in a railway carriage? Dear me," said
Nastasia, thoughtfully, as though trying to recall something to mind.

"Oh, just a silly, little occurrence, really not worth telling, about
Princess Bielokonski's governess, Miss Smith, and--oh, it is really not
worth telling!"

"No, no, we must have it!" cried Nastasia merrily.

"Yes, of course," said Ferdishenko. "C'est du nouveau."

"Ardalion," said Nina Alexandrovitch, entreatingly.

"Papa, you are wanted!" cried Colia.

"Well, it is a silly little story, in a few words," began the delighted
general. "A couple of years ago, soon after the new railway was opened,
I had to go somewhere or other on business. Well, I took a first-class
ticket, sat down, and began to smoke, or rather _continued_ to smoke, for
I had lighted up before. I was alone in the carriage. Smoking is not
allowed, but is not prohibited either; it is half allowed--so to speak,
winked at. I had the window open."

"Suddenly, just before the whistle, in came two ladies with a little
poodle, and sat down opposite to me; not bad-looking women; one was in
light blue, the other in black silk. The poodle, a beauty with a silver
collar, lay on light blue's knee. They looked haughtily about, and
talked English together. I took no notice, just went on smoking. I
observed that the ladies were getting angry--over my cigar, doubtless.
One looked at me through her tortoise-shell eyeglass.

"I took no notice, because they never said a word. If they didn't like
the cigar, why couldn't they say so? Not a word, not a hint! Suddenly,
and without the very slightest suspicion of warning, 'light blue' seizes
my cigar from between my fingers, and, wheugh! out of the window with
it! Well, on flew the train, and I sat bewildered, and the young woman,
tall and fair, and rather red in the face, too red, glared at me with
flashing eyes.

"I didn't say a word, but with extreme courtesy, I may say with most
refined courtesy, I reached my finger and thumb over towards the poodle,
took it up delicately by the nape of the neck, and chucked it out of
the window, after the cigar. The train went flying on, and the poodle's
yells were lost in the distance."

"Oh, you naughty man!" cried Nastasia, laughing and clapping her hands
like a child.

"Bravo!" said Ferdishenko. Ptitsin laughed too, though he had been very
sorry to see the general appear. Even Colia laughed and said, "Bravo!"

"And I was right, truly right," cried the general, with warmth and
solemnity, "for if cigars are forbidden in railway carriages, poodles
are much more so."

"Well, and what did the lady do?" asked Nastasia, impatiently.

"She--ah, that's where all the mischief of it lies!" replied Ivolgin,
frowning. "Without a word, as it were, of warning, she slapped me on the
cheek! An extraordinary woman!"

"And you?"

The general dropped his eyes, and elevated his brows; shrugged his
shoulders, tightened his lips, spread his hands, and remained silent. At
last he blurted out:

"I lost my head!"

"Did you hit her?"

"No, oh no!--there was a great flare-up, but I didn't hit her! I had to
struggle a little, purely to defend myself; but the very devil was
in the business. It turned out that 'light blue' was an Englishwoman,
governess or something, at Princess Bielokonski's, and the other woman
was one of the old-maid princesses Bielokonski. Well, everybody knows
what great friends the princess and Mrs. Epanchin are, so there was a
pretty kettle of fish. All the Bielokonskis went into mourning for the
poodle. Six princesses in tears, and the Englishwoman shrieking!

"Of course I wrote an apology, and called, but they would not receive
either me or my apology, and the Epanchins cut me, too!"

"But wait," said Nastasia. "How is it that, five or six days since,
I read exactly the same story in the paper, as happening between a
Frenchman and an English girl? The cigar was snatched away exactly as
you describe, and the poodle was chucked out of the window after it. The
slapping came off, too, as in your case; and the girl's dress was light
blue!"

The general blushed dreadfully; Colia blushed too; and Ptitsin turned
hastily away. Ferdishenko was the only one who laughed as gaily as
before. As to Gania, I need not say that he was miserable; he stood dumb
and wretched and took no notice of anybody.

"I assure you," said the general, "that exactly the same thing happened
to myself!"

"I remembered there was some quarrel between father and Miss Smith, the
Bielokonski's governess," said Colia.

"How very curious, point for point the same anecdote, and happening at
different ends of Europe! Even the light blue dress the same," continued
the pitiless Nastasia. "I must really send you the paper."

"You must observe," insisted the general, "that my experience was two
years earlier."

"Ah! that's it, no doubt!"

Nastasia Philipovna laughed hysterically.

"Father, will you hear a word from me outside!" said Gania, his voice
shaking with agitation, as he seized his father by the shoulder. His
eyes shone with a blaze of hatred.

At this moment there was a terrific bang at the front door, almost
enough to break it down. Some most unusual visitor must have arrived.
Colia ran to open.

X.

The entrance-hall suddenly became full of noise and people. To judge
from the sounds which penetrated to the drawing-room, a number of people
had already come in, and the stampede continued. Several voices were
talking and shouting at once; others were talking and shouting on the
stairs outside; it was evidently a most extraordinary visit that was
about to take place.

Everyone exchanged startled glances. Gania rushed out towards the
dining-room, but a number of men had already made their way in, and met
him.

"Ah! here he is, the Judas!" cried a voice which the prince recognized
at once. "How d'ye do, Gania, you old blackguard?"

"Yes, that's the man!" said another voice.

There was no room for doubt in the prince's mind: one of the voices was
Rogojin's, and the other Lebedeff's.

Gania stood at the door like a block and looked on in silence, putting
no obstacle in the way of their entrance, and ten or a dozen men
marched in behind Parfen Rogojin. They were a decidedly mixed-looking
collection, and some of them came in in their furs and caps. None of
them were quite drunk, but all appeared to be considerably excited.

They seemed to need each other's support, morally, before they dared
come in; not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest each
one was brave enough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at the head
of his troop; but he was evidently preoccupied. He appeared to be gloomy
and morose, and had clearly come with some end in view. All the rest
were merely chorus, brought in to support the chief character. Besides
Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff, who came in without his coat
and hat, two or three others followed his example; the rest were
more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in
a great-coat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who
laughed continuously, and an enormously tall stout one who apparently
put great faith in the strength of his fists. A couple of "ladies" of
some sort put their heads in at the front door, but did not dare come
any farther. Colia promptly banged the door in their faces and locked
it.

"Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn't expect Rogojin, eh?" said the
latter, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before Gania.

But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna.
He had not dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance
produced a marvellous effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips became
actually blue.

"I suppose it is true, then!" he muttered to himself, and his face took
on an expression of despair. "So that's the end of it! Now you, sir,
will you answer me or not?" he went on suddenly, gazing at Gania with
ineffable malice. "Now then, you--"

He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the
room mechanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became
more or less embarrassed, in spite of his excitement. His followers
entered after him, and all paused a moment at sight of the ladies. Of
course their modesty was not fated to be long-lived, but for a moment
they were abashed. Once let them begin to shout, however, and nothing on
earth should disconcert them.

"What, you here too, prince?" said Rogojin, absently, but a little
surprised all the same "Still in your gaiters, eh?" He sighed, and
forgot the prince next moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to
Nastasia again, as though attracted in that direction by some magnetic
force.

Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania
recollected himself at last.

"Excuse me, sirs," he said, loudly, "but what does all this mean?"
He glared at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his remarks
especially to their captain, Rogojin. "You are not in a stable,
gentlemen, though you may think it--my mother and sister are present."

"Yes, I see your mother and sister," muttered Rogojin, through his
teeth; and Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the
statement.

"At all events, I must request you to step into the salon," said Gania,
his rage rising quite out of proportion to his words, "and then I shall
inquire--"

"What, he doesn't know me!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth
disagreeably. "He doesn't recognize Rogojin!" He did not move an inch,
however.

"I have met you somewhere, I believe, but--"

"Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it's only three months since I lost two
hundred roubles of my father's money to you, at cards. The old fellow
died before he found out. Ptitsin knows all about it. Why, I've only to
pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you'd crawl on your
hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that's the sort of
man you are. Why, I've come now, at this moment, to buy you up! Oh, you
needn't think that because I wear these boots I have no money. I have
lots of money, my beauty,--enough to buy up you and all yours together.
So I shall, if I like to! I'll buy you up! I will!" he yelled,
apparently growing more and more intoxicated and excited. "Oh, Nastasia
Philipovna! don't turn me out! Say one word, do! Are you going to marry
this man, or not?"

Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity,
with the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to
lose.

He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.

Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical expression of
face; but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from them
to Gania, she changed her tone, all of a sudden.

"Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you
to ask such a question?" she replied, quietly and seriously, and even,
apparently, with some astonishment.

"No? No?" shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy. "You are
not going to, after all? And they told me--oh, Nastasia Philipovna--they
said you had promised to marry him, _him!_ As if you _could_ do
it!--him--pooh! I don't mind saying it to everyone--I'd buy him off
for a hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give him a thousand, or three if he
likes, poor devil, and he'd cut and run the day before his wedding, and
leave his bride to me! Wouldn't you, Gania, you blackguard? You'd take
three thousand, wouldn't you? Here's the money! Look, I've come on
purpose to pay you off and get your receipt, formally. I said I'd buy
you up, and so I will."

"Get out of this, you drunken beast!" cried Gania, who was red and white
by turns.

Rogojin's troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at
this. Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen's ear.

"You're right, clerk," said the latter, "you're right, tipsy
spirit--you're right!--Nastasia Philipovna," he added, looking at her
like some lunatic, harmless generally, but suddenly wound up to a pitch
of audacity, "here are eighteen thousand roubles, and--and you shall
have more--." Here he threw a packet of bank-notes tied up in white
paper, on the table before her, not daring to say all he wished to say.

"No--no--no!" muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He was clearly
aghast at the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller amount
should have been tried first.

"No, you fool--you don't know whom you are dealing with--and it appears
I am a fool, too!" said Parfen, trembling beneath the flashing glance
of Nastasia. "Oh, curse it all! What a fool I was to listen to you!" he
added, with profound melancholy.

Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly burst
out laughing.

"Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at
once," she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa
and prepared to go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the
heart.

"Forty thousand, then--forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by
seven o'clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles--paid down on the nail!"

The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia Philipovna
continued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna and Varia had
both risen from their places and were waiting, in silent horror, to
see what would happen. Varia's eyes were all ablaze with anger; but
the scene had a different effect on Nina Alexandrovna. She paled and
trembled, and looked more and more like fainting every moment.

"Very well then, a _hundred_ thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this
very day. Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your
fingers--come!"

"You are mad!" said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by the
