'reason.' I quite understand that. And yet that was my whole motive for
coming. You see I have not been in Russia for four years, and knew very
little about anything when I left. I had been very ill for a long time,
and I feel now the need of a few good friends. In fact, I have a certain
question upon which I much need advice, and do not know whom to go to
for it. I thought of your family when I was passing through Berlin.
'They are almost relations,' I said to myself,' so I'll begin with them;
perhaps we may get on with each other, I with them and they with me, if
they are kind people;' and I have heard that you are very kind people!"

"Oh, thank you, thank you, I'm sure," replied the general, considerably
taken aback. "May I ask where you have taken up your quarters?"

"Nowhere, as yet."

"What, straight from the station to my house? And how about your
luggage?"

"I only had a small bundle, containing linen, with me, nothing more. I
can carry it in my hand, easily. There will be plenty of time to take a
room in some hotel by the evening."

"Oh, then you _do_ intend to take a room?"

"Of course."

"To judge from your words, you came straight to my house with the
intention of staying there."

"That could only have been on your invitation. I confess, however, that
I should not have stayed here even if you had invited me, not for any
particular reason, but because it is--well, contrary to my practice and
nature, somehow."

"Oh, indeed! Then it is perhaps as well that I neither _did_ invite you,
nor _do_ invite you now. Excuse me, prince, but we had better make this
matter clear, once for all. We have just agreed that with regard to our
relationship there is not much to be said, though, of course, it would
have been very delightful to us to feel that such relationship did
actually exist; therefore, perhaps--"

"Therefore, perhaps I had better get up and go away?" said the prince,
laughing merrily as he rose from his place; just as merrily as though
the circumstances were by no means strained or difficult. "And I give
you my word, general, that though I know nothing whatever of manners and
customs of society, and how people live and all that, yet I felt quite
sure that this visit of mine would end exactly as it has ended now.
Oh, well, I suppose it's all right; especially as my letter was not
answered. Well, good-bye, and forgive me for having disturbed you!"

The prince's expression was so good-natured at this moment, and so
entirely free from even a suspicion of unpleasant feeling was the
smile with which he looked at the general as he spoke, that the latter
suddenly paused, and appeared to gaze at his guest from quite a new
point of view, all in an instant.

"Do you know, prince," he said, in quite a different tone, "I do not
know you at all, yet, and after all, Elizabetha Prokofievna would
very likely be pleased to have a peep at a man of her own name. Wait a
little, if you don't mind, and if you have time to spare?"

"Oh, I assure you I've lots of time, my time is entirely my own!" And
the prince immediately replaced his soft, round hat on the table. "I
confess, I thought Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely remember
that I had written her a letter. Just now your servant--outside
there--was dreadfully suspicious that I had come to beg of you. I
noticed that! Probably he has very strict instructions on that score;
but I assure you I did not come to beg. I came to make some friends.
But I am rather bothered at having disturbed you; that's all I care
about.--"

"Look here, prince," said the general, with a cordial smile, "if you
really are the sort of man you appear to be, it may be a source of great
pleasure to us to make your better acquaintance; but, you see, I am
a very busy man, and have to be perpetually sitting here and signing
papers, or off to see his excellency, or to my department, or somewhere;
so that though I should be glad to see more of people, nice people--you
see, I--however, I am sure you are so well brought up that you will see
at once, and--but how old are you, prince?"

"Twenty-six."

"No? I thought you very much younger."

"Yes, they say I have a 'young' face. As to disturbing you I shall soon
learn to avoid doing that, for I hate disturbing people. Besides, you
and I are so differently constituted, I should think, that there must be
very little in common between us. Not that I will ever believe there is
_nothing_ in common between any two people, as some declare is the case.
I am sure people make a great mistake in sorting each other into groups,
by appearances; but I am boring you, I see, you--"

"Just two words: have you any means at all? Or perhaps you may be
intending to undertake some sort of employment? Excuse my questioning
you, but--"

"Oh, my dear sir, I esteem and understand your kindness in putting the
question. No; at present I have no means whatever, and no employment
either, but I hope to find some. I was living on other people abroad.
Schneider, the professor who treated me and taught me, too, in
Switzerland, gave me just enough money for my journey, so that now I
have but a few copecks left. There certainly is one question upon which
I am anxious to have advice, but--"

"Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?"
interrupted the general.

"I wish to work, somehow or other."

"Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any talents,
or ability in any direction--that is, any that would bring in money and
bread? Excuse me again--"

"Oh, don't apologize. No, I don't think I have either talents or special
abilities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an invalid
and unable to learn much. As for bread, I should think--"

The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince again
replied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that the
general had known Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an interest
in the prince, that young gentleman could not explain; probably by
virtue of the old friendship with his father, he thought.

The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and
Pavlicheff had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own,
living in the country, the child needing the fresh air and exercise of
country life. He was educated, first by a governess, and afterwards by a
tutor, but could not remember much about this time of his life. His fits
were so frequent then, that they made almost an idiot of him (the prince
used the expression "idiot" himself). Pavlicheff had met Professor
Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had persuaded him to send the boy
to Switzerland, to Schneider's establishment there, for the cure of his
epilepsy, and, five years before this time, the prince was sent off. But
Pavlicheff had died two or three years since, and Schneider had himself
supported the young fellow, from that day to this, at his own expense.
Although he had not quite cured him, he had greatly improved his
condition; and now, at last, at the prince's own desire, and because
of a certain matter which came to the ears of the latter, Schneider had
despatched the young man to Russia.

The general was much astonished.

"Then you have no one, absolutely _no_ one in Russia?" he asked.

"No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a
letter from--"

"At all events," put in the general, not listening to the news about the
letter, "at all events, you must have learned _something_, and your
malady would not prevent your undertaking some easy work, in one of the
departments, for instance?"

"Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one
for I am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned
a good deal in the last four years, and, besides, I read a great many
Russian books."

"Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite
correctly?"

"Oh dear, yes!"

"Capital! And your handwriting?"

"Ah, there I am _really_ talented! I may say I am a real caligraphist. Let
me write you something, just to show you," said the prince, with some
excitement.

"With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness,
prince; in fact, I must say--I--I--like you very well, altogether," said
the general.

"What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils
and things, and what beautiful paper! It's a charming room altogether.
I know that picture, it's a Swiss view. I'm sure the artist painted it
from nature, and that I have seen the very place--"

"Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some
paper. Here are pens and paper; now then, take this table. What's
this?" the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a large
photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior. "Halloa!
Nastasia Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?" he inquired,
with much curiosity and great animation.

"She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked
her for it long ago. I don't know whether she meant it for a hint that
I had come empty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what,"
added Gania, with an unpleasant smile.

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense," said the general, with decision. "What
extraordinary ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint; that's
not her way at all. Besides, what could _you_ give her, without having
thousands at your disposal? You might have given her your portrait,
however. Has she ever asked you for it?"

"No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven't
forgotten about tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of
those specially invited, you know."

"Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think
so! She's twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must
be ready for great things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy
Ivanovitch that she will give a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So be
prepared!"

Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than ever.

"Are you sure she said that?" he asked, and his voice seemed to quiver
as he spoke.

"Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she
wished us to tell you nothing about it until the day."

The general watched Gania's confusion intently, and clearly did not like
it.

"Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch," said Gania, in great agitation, "that I
was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was to have
my 'yes or no' free."

"Why, don't you, aren't you--" began the general, in alarm.

"Oh, don't misunderstand--"

"But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?"

"Oh, I'm not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but I
didn't mean that."

"Reject her! I should think not!" said the general with annoyance, and
apparently not in the least anxious to conceal it. "Why, my dear
fellow, it's not a question of your rejecting her, it is whether you are
prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper satisfaction.
How are things going on at home?"

"At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will
make a fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general
nuisance. I don't ever talk to him now, but I hold him in check, safe
enough. I swear if it had not been for my mother, I should have shown
him the way out, long ago. My mother is always crying, of course, and my
sister sulks. I had to tell them at last that I intended to be master of
my own destiny, and that I expect to be obeyed at home. At least, I gave
my sister to understand as much, and my mother was present."

"Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!" said the general, shrugging
his shoulders and dropping his hands. "You remember your mother, Nina
Alexandrovna, that day she came and sat here and groaned--and when I
asked her what was the matter, she says, 'Oh, it's such a _dishonour_
to us!' dishonour! Stuff and nonsense! I should like to know who can
reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a word of any kind against
her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with Totski? What
nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, says
Nina Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don't see how she can fail
to--to understand--"

"Her own position?" prompted Gania. "She does understand. Don't be
annoyed with her. I have warned her not to meddle in other people's
affairs. However, although there's comparative peace at home at present,
the storm will break if anything is finally settled tonight."

The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at
the table, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his
labour to the general's desk.

"So this is Nastasia Philipovna," he said, looking attentively and
curiously at the portrait. "How wonderfully beautiful!" he immediately
added, with warmth. The picture was certainly that of an unusually
lovely woman. She was photographed in a black silk dress of simple
design, her hair was evidently dark and plainly arranged, her eyes were
deep and thoughtful, the expression of her face passionate, but proud.
She was rather thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania and the
general gazed at the prince in amazement.

"How do you know it's Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the general; "you
surely don't know her already, do you?"

"Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of
the great beauty!" And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with
Rogojin in the train and the whole of the latter's story.

"There's news!" said the general in some excitement, after listening to
the story with engrossed attention.

"Oh, of course it's nothing but humbug!" cried Gania, a little
disturbed, however. "It's all humbug; the young merchant was pleased
to indulge in a little innocent recreation! I have heard something of
Rogojin!"

"Yes, so have I!" replied the general. "Nastasia Philipovna told us
all about the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different
matter. You see the fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is
passionately in love. The whole story smells of passion, and we all
know what this class of gentry is capable of when infatuated. I am much
afraid of some disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!"

"You are afraid of the million, I suppose," said Gania, grinning and
showing his teeth.

"And you are _not_, I presume, eh?"

"How did he strike you, prince?" asked Gania, suddenly. "Did he seem to
be a serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was your
own opinion about the matter?"

While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his
brain, and blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was
really agitated and disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not
seem to expect much from his reply.

"I really don't quite know how to tell you," replied the prince, "but
it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of passion, and not,
perhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far from well.
Very likely he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if he
lives fast."

"No! do you think so?" said the general, catching at the idea.

"Yes, I do think so!"

"Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment. It
may be this very evening," remarked Gania to the general, with a smile.

"Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on
in her brain at this moment."

"You know the kind of person she is at times."

"How? What kind of person is she?" cried the general, arrived at the
limits of his patience. "Look here, Gania, don't you go annoying her
tonight. What you are to do is to be as agreeable towards her as ever you
can. Well, what are you smiling at? You must understand, Gania, that
I have no interest whatever in speaking like this. Whichever way the
question is settled, it will be to my advantage. Nothing will move
Totski from his resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anything I
desire, you must know that it is your benefit only. Can't you trust me?
You are a sensible fellow, and I have been counting on you; for, in this
matter, that, that--"

"Yes, that's the chief thing," said Gania, helping the general out of
his difficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed smile,
which he did not attempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes
straight into those of the general, as though he were anxious that the
latter might read his thoughts.

The general grew purple with anger.

"Yes, of course it is the chief thing!" he cried, looking sharply at
Gania. "What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to
be _glad_ to hear of this millionaire fellow's arrival--just as though you
wished for an excuse to get out of the whole thing. This is an affair in
which you ought to act honestly with both sides, and give due warning,
to avoid compromising others. But, even now, there is still time. Do
you understand me? I wish to know whether you desire this arrangement or
whether you do not? If not, say so,--and--and welcome! No one is trying
to force you into the snare, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, if you see a snare
in the matter, at least."

"I do desire it," murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his eyes;
and he relapsed into gloomy silence.

The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently
now regretting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and
suddenly the disagreeable thought of the latter's presence struck
him, and the certainty that he must have heard every word of the
conversation. But he felt at ease in another moment; it only needed one
glance at the prince to see that in that quarter there was nothing to
fear.

"Oh!" cried the general, catching sight of the prince's specimen of
caligraphy, which the latter had now handed him for inspection. "Why,
this is simply beautiful; look at that, Gania, there's real talent
there!"

On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval
characters the legend:

"The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this."

"There," explained the prince, with great delight and animation, "there,
that's the abbot's real signature--from a manuscript of the fourteenth
century. All these old abbots and bishops used to write most
beautifully, with such taste and so much care and diligence. Have you no
copy of Pogodin, general? If you had one I could show you another type.
Stop a bit--here you have the large round writing common in France
during the eighteenth century. Some of the letters are shaped quite
differently from those now in use. It was the writing current then, and
employed by public writers generally. I copied this from one of them,
and you can see how good it is. Look at the well-rounded a and d. I
have tried to translate the French character into the Russian letters--a
difficult thing to do, but I think I have succeeded fairly. Here is a
fine sentence, written in a good, original hand--'Zeal triumphs over
all.' That is the script of the Russian War Office. That is how official
documents addressed to important personages should be written. The
letters are round, the type black, and the style somewhat remarkable. A
stylist would not allow these ornaments, or attempts at flourishes--just
look at these unfinished tails!--but it has distinction and really
depicts the soul of the writer. He would like to give play to his
imagination, and follow the inspiration of his genius, but a soldier is
only at ease in the guard-room, and the pen stops half-way, a slave
to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met an example of this
handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you think I
chanced to find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is an
ordinary English hand. It can hardly be improved, it is so refined and
exquisite--almost perfection. This is an example of another kind,
a mixture of styles. The copy was given me by a French commercial
traveller. It is founded on the English, but the downstrokes are a
little blacker, and more marked. Notice that the oval has some slight
modification--it is more rounded. This writing allows for flourishes;
now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its use requires such taste, but,
if successful, what a distinction it gives to the whole! It results in
an incomparable type--one to fall in love with!"

"Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the
question! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an
artist! Eh, Gania?"

"Wonderful!" said Gania. "And he knows it too," he added, with a
sarcastic smile.

"You may smile,--but there's a career in this," said the general. "You
don't know what a great personage I shall show this to, prince. Why, you
can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month to start with.
However, it's half-past twelve," he concluded, looking at his watch; "so
to business, prince, for I must be setting to work and shall not see you
again today. Sit down a minute. I have told you that I cannot receive
you myself very often, but I should like to be of some assistance to
you, some small assistance, of a kind that would give you satisfaction.
I shall find you a place in one of the State departments, an easy
place--but you will require to be accurate. Now, as to your plans--in
the house, or rather in the family of Gania here--my young friend, whom
I hope you will know better--his mother and sister have prepared two
or three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly recommended young
fellows, with board and attendance. I am sure Nina Alexandrovna will
take you in on my recommendation. There you will be comfortable and well
taken care of; for I do not think, prince, that you are the sort of
man to be left to the mercy of Fate in a town like Petersburg. Nina
Alexandrovna, Gania's mother, and Varvara Alexandrovna, are ladies for
whom I have the highest possible esteem and respect. Nina Alexandrovna
is the wife of General Ardalion Alexandrovitch, my old brother in arms,
with whom, I regret to say, on account of certain circumstances, I am no
longer acquainted. I give you all this information, prince, in order
to make it clear to you that I am personally recommending you to this
family, and that in so doing, I am more or less taking upon myself to
answer for you. The terms are most reasonable, and I trust that your
salary will very shortly prove amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of
course pocket-money is a necessity, if only a little; do not be angry,
prince, if I strongly recommend you to avoid carrying money in your
pocket. But as your purse is quite empty at the present moment, you must
allow me to press these twenty-five roubles upon your acceptance, as
something to begin with. Of course we will settle this little matter
another time, and if you are the upright, honest man you look, I
anticipate very little trouble between us on that score. Taking so much
interest in you as you may perceive I do, I am not without my object,
and you shall know it in good time. You see, I am perfectly candid with
you. I hope, Gania, you have nothing to say against the prince's taking
up his abode in your house?"

"Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad," said Gania,
courteously and kindly.

"I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not? That
fellow Ferd-Ferd--"

"Ferdishenko."

"Yes--I don't like that Ferdishenko. I can't understand why Nastasia
Philipovna encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he says?"

"Oh dear no, it's all a joke. No more cousin than I am."

"Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?"

"Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more
so since I did not ask you to help me. I don't say that out of pride. I
certainly did not know where to lay my head tonight. Rogojin asked me to
come to his house, of course, but--"

"Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you,
paternally,--or, if you prefer it, as a friend,--to forget all about
Rogojin, and, in fact, to stick to the family into which you are about
to enter."

"Thank you," began the prince; "and since you are so very kind there is
just one matter which I--"

"You must really excuse me," interrupted the general, "but I positively
haven't another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha Prokofievna
about you, and if she wishes to receive you at once--as I shall advise
her--I strongly recommend you to ingratiate yourself with her at the
first opportunity, for my wife may be of the greatest service to you in
many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you must be content to wait
till another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over these accounts,
will you? We mustn't forget to finish off that matter--"

The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching
the business which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so
four times.

Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter accepted
the offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb Gania's work.
He commenced to examine the study and its contents. But Gania hardly
so much as glanced at the papers lying before him; he was absent and
thoughtful, and his smile and general appearance struck the prince still
more disagreeably now that the two were left alone together.

Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over
Nastasia Philipovna's portrait, gazing at it.

"Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?" he asked, looking intently
at him. He seemed to have some special object in the question.

"It's a wonderful face," said the prince, "and I feel sure that her
destiny is not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face is
smiling enough, but she must have suffered terribly--hasn't she? Her
eyes show it--those two bones there, the little points under her eyes,
just where the cheek begins. It's a proud face too, terribly proud! And
I--I can't say whether she is good and kind, or not. Oh, if she be but
good! That would make all well!"

"And would you marry a woman like that, now?" continued Gania, never
taking his excited eyes off the prince's face.

"I cannot marry at all," said the latter. "I am an invalid."

"Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?"

"Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her
tomorrow!--marry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!"

Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a
fearful shudder that the prince almost cried out.

"What's the matter?" said he, seizing Gania's hand.

"Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her excellency's
apartments!" announced the footman, appearing at the door.

The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.

IV.

All three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, well-grown,
with good shoulders and busts, and strong--almost masculine--hands;
and, of course, with all the above attributes, they enjoyed capital
appetites, of which they were not in the least ashamed.

Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were
a little too candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward
deference to their mother these three young women, in solemn conclave,
had long agreed to modify the unquestioning obedience which they had
been in the habit of according to her; and Mrs. General Epanchin had
judged it better to say nothing about it, though, of course, she was
well aware of the fact.

It is true that her nature sometimes rebelled against these dictates
of reason, and that she grew yearly more capricious and impatient; but
having a respectful and well-disciplined husband under her thumb at
all times, she found it possible, as a rule, to empty any little
accumulations of spleen upon his head, and therefore the harmony of the
family was kept duly balanced, and things went as smoothly as family
matters can.

Mrs. Epanchin had a fair appetite herself, and generally took her share
of the capital mid-day lunch which was always served for the girls, and
which was nearly as good as a dinner. The young ladies used to have a
cup of coffee each before this meal, at ten o'clock, while still in bed.
This was a favourite and unalterable arrangement with them. At half-past
twelve, the table was laid in the small dining-room, and occasionally
the general himself appeared at the family gathering, if he had time.

Besides tea and coffee, cheese, honey, butter, pan-cakes of various
kinds (the lady of the house loved these best), cutlets, and so on,
there was generally strong beef soup, and other substantial delicacies.

On the particular morning on which our story has opened, the family had
assembled in the dining-room, and were waiting the general's appearance,
the latter having promised to come this day. If he had been one moment
late, he would have been sent for at once; but he turned up punctually.

As he came forward to wish his wife good-morning and kiss her hands, as
his custom was, he observed something in her look which boded ill. He
thought he knew the reason, and had expected it, but still, he was not
altogether comfortable. His daughters advanced to kiss him, too, and
though they did not look exactly angry, there was something strange in
their expression as well.

The general was, owing to certain circumstances, a little inclined to be
too suspicious at home, and needlessly nervous; but, as an experienced
father and husband, he judged it better to take measures at once to
protect himself from any dangers there might be in the air.

However, I hope I shall not interfere with the proper sequence of my
narrative too much, if I diverge for a moment at this point, in order
to explain the mutual relations between General Epanchin's family and
others acting a part in this history, at the time when we take up the
thread of their destiny. I have already stated that the general, though
he was a man of lowly origin, and of poor education, was, for all that,
an experienced and talented husband and father. Among other things,
he considered it undesirable to hurry his daughters to the matrimonial
altar and to worry them too much with assurances of his paternal wishes
for their happiness, as is the custom among parents of many grown-up
daughters. He even succeeded in ranging his wife on his side on this
question, though he found the feat very difficult to accomplish, because
unnatural; but the general's arguments were conclusive, and founded upon
obvious facts. The general considered that the girls' taste and good
sense should be allowed to develop and mature deliberately, and that the
parents' duty should merely be to keep watch, in order that no strange
or undesirable choice be made; but that the selection once effected,
both father and mother were bound from that moment to enter heart and
soul into the cause, and to see that the matter progressed without
hindrance until the altar should be happily reached.

Besides this, it was clear that the Epanchins' position gained each
year, with geometrical accuracy, both as to financial solidity and
social weight; and, therefore, the longer the girls waited, the better
was their chance of making a brilliant match.

But again, amidst the incontrovertible facts just recorded, one more,
equally significant, rose up to confront the family; and this was,
that the eldest daughter, Alexandra, had imperceptibly arrived at her
twenty-fifth birthday. Almost at the same moment, Afanasy Ivanovitch
Totski, a man of immense wealth, high connections, and good standing,
announced his intention of marrying. Afanasy Ivanovitch was a gentleman
of fifty-five years of age, artistically gifted, and of most refined
tastes. He wished to marry well, and, moreover, he was a keen admirer
and judge of beauty.

Now, since Totski had, of late, been upon terms of great cordiality with
Epanchin, which excellent relations were intensified by the fact that
they were, so to speak, partners in several financial enterprises, it
so happened that the former now put in a friendly request to the general
for counsel with regard to the important step he meditated. Might he
suggest, for instance, such a thing as a marriage between himself and
one of the general's daughters?

Evidently the quiet, pleasant current of the family life of the
Epanchins was about to undergo a change.

The undoubted beauty of the family, _par excellence_, was the youngest,
Aglaya, as aforesaid. But Totski himself, though an egotist of the
extremest type, realized that he had no chance there; Aglaya was clearly
not for such as he.

Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or
less exaggerated Aglaya's chances of happiness. In their opinion, the
latter's destiny was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in
a heaven on earth. Aglaya's husband was to be a compendium of all the
virtues, and of all success, not to speak of fabulous wealth. The two
elder sisters had agreed that all was to be sacrificed by them, if need
be, for Aglaya's sake; her dowry was to be colossal and unprecedented.

The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore,
when Totski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made
no doubt that one of the two elder girls would probably accept the
offer, since Totski would certainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The
general valued the proposal very highly. He knew life, and realized what
such an offer was worth.

The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive,
at least consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest,
Alexandra, would very likely be disposed to listen to a proposal.

Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own. She
was intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski, she
would make him a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant marriage;
she was eminently a woman calculated to soothe and sweeten the life of
any man; decidedly pretty, if not absolutely handsome. What better could
Totski wish?

So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed to
avoid any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra's parents had not even
begun to talk to their daughters freely upon the subject, when suddenly,
as it were, a dissonant chord was struck amid the harmony of the
proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin began to show signs of discontent, and
that was a serious matter. A certain circumstance had crept in, a
disagreeable and troublesome factor, which threatened to overturn the
whole business.

This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before. Close
to an estate of Totski's, in one of the central provinces of Russia,
there lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the
wretchedest description. This gentleman was noted in the district for
his persistent ill-fortune; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards
family and descent, he was vastly superior to Totski, but his estate was
mortgaged to the last acre. One day, when he had ridden over to the town
to see a creditor, the chief peasant of his village followed him shortly
after, with the news that his house had been burnt down, and that his
wife had perished with it, but his children were safe.

Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could
not stand this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the
town hospital. His estate was sold for the creditors; and the little
girls--two of them, of seven and eight years of age respectively,--were
adopted by Totski, who undertook their maintenance and education in the
kindness of his heart. They were brought up together with the children
of his German bailiff. Very soon, however, there was only one of
them left--Nastasia Philipovna--for the other little one died of
whooping-cough. Totski, who was living abroad at this time, very soon
forgot all about the child; but five years after, returning to Russia,
it struck him that he would like to look over his estate and see how
matters were going there, and, arrived at his bailiff's house, he was
not long in discovering that among the children of the latter there now
dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and
bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual quality-as to
which last Totski was an undoubted authority.

He only stayed at his country seat a few days on this occasion, but
he had time to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in
the child's education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of
experience and culture. For four years this lady resided in the house
with little Nastia, and then the education was considered complete.
The governess took her departure, and another lady came down to fetch
Nastia, by Totski's instructions. The child was now transported to
another of Totski's estates in a distant part of the country. Here
she found a delightful little house, just built, and prepared for her
reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her abode
together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In
the house there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of
all sorts, a charming "young lady's library," pictures, paint-boxes,
a lap-dog, and everything to make life agreeable. Within a fortnight
Totski himself arrived, and from that time he appeared to have taken a
great fancy to this part of the world and came down each summer, staying
two and three months at a time. So passed four years peacefully and
happily, in charming surroundings.

At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski's last
visit (he had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report reached
Nastasia Philipovna that he was about to be married in St. Petersburg,
to a rich, eminent, and lovely woman. The report was only partially
true, the marriage project being only in an embryo condition; but a
great change now came over Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenly displayed
unusual decision of character; and without wasting time in thought,
she left her country home and came up to St. Petersburg, straight to
Totski's house, all alone.

The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure;
but he very soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and
everything else, with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An
entirely new and different woman sat before him, between whom and
the girl he had left in the country last July there seemed nothing in
common.

In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was
usual for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could not
help wondering where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not from
her "young lady's library"? It even embraced legal matters, and the
"world" in general, to a considerable extent.

Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish
alternations of timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the
reveries, the tears, the playfulness... It was an entirely new and
hitherto unknown being who now sat and laughed at him, and informed him
to his face that she had never had the faintest feeling for him of any
kind, except loathing and contempt--contempt which had followed closely
upon her sensations of surprise and bewilderment after her first
acquaintance with him.

This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was
absolutely the same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to
prevent this marriage--for no particular reason, but that she _chose_ to
do so, and because she wished to amuse herself at his expense for that
it was "quite her turn to laugh a little now!"

Such were her words--very likely she did not give her real reason for
this eccentric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the explanation
she deigned to offer.

Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered ideas
would permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at the
end of that time his resolution was taken. The fact was, Totski was
at that time a man of fifty years of age; his position was solid and
respectable; his place in society had long been firmly fixed upon safe
foundations; he loved himself, his personal comforts, and his position
better than all the world, as every respectable gentleman should!

At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that
he now had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the ordinary
rules of traditional behaviour, and who would not only threaten mischief
but would undoubtedly carry it out, and stop for no one.

There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm of
the mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against whom
or what, some insatiable contempt--in a word, something altogether
absurd and impossible, but at the same time most dangerous to be met
with by any respectable person with a position in society to keep up.

For a man of Totski's wealth and standing, it would, of course, have
been the simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at
once from all annoyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia
Philipovna to harm him in any way, either legally or by stirring up a
scandal, for, in case of the latter danger, he could so easily remove
her to a sphere of safety. However, these arguments would only hold good
in case of Nastasia acting as others might in such an emergency. She was
much more likely to overstep the bounds of reasonable conduct by some
extraordinary eccentricity.

Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized
that Nastasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing
by legal means to injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some
entirely different intention.

Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of
perpetrating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere
pleasure of injuring a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a sense
of loathing and contempt. He had sufficient insight to understand that
she valued nothing in the world--herself least of all--and he made no
attempt to conceal the fact that he was a coward in some respects. For
instance, if he had been told that he would be stabbed at the altar, or
publicly insulted, he would undoubtedly have been frightened; but not so
much at the idea of being murdered, or wounded, or insulted, as at the
thought that if such things were to happen he would be made to look
ridiculous in the eyes of society.

He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound
him and how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo,
Totski decided to conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was
strengthened by the fact that Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered
of late. It would be difficult to conceive how different she was
physically, at the present time, to the girl of a few years ago. She was
pretty then... but now!... Totski laughed angrily when he thought how
short-sighted he had been. In days gone by he remembered how he had
looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he had marvelled at their
dark mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze which seemed to seek
an answer to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had altered. She
was now exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her more
beautiful. Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised such
a cheaply-bought conquest, but of late years he had begun to think
differently about it. It had struck him as long ago as last spring that
he ought to be finding a good match for Nastasia; for instance, some
respectable and reasonable young fellow serving in a government office
in another part of the country. How maliciously Nastasia laughed at the
idea of such a thing, now!

However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another
way; and he determined to establish her in St. Petersburg, surrounding
her with all the comforts and luxuries that his wealth could command. In
this way he might gain glory in certain circles.

Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that
time a great deal happened. Totski's position was very uncomfortable;
having "funked" once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was
afraid, he did not know why, but he was simply _afraid_ of Nastasia
Philipovna. For the first two years or so he had suspected that she
wished to marry him herself, and that only her vanity prevented her
telling him so. He thought that she wanted him to approach her with a
humble proposal from his own side. But to his great, and not entirely
pleasurable amazement, he discovered that this was by no means the case,
and that were he to offer himself he would be refused. He could not
understand such a state of things, and was obliged to conclude that it
was pride, the pride of an injured and imaginative woman, which had
gone to such lengths that it preferred to sit and nurse its contempt and
hatred in solitude rather than mount to heights of hitherto unattainable
splendour. To make matters worse, she was quite impervious to mercenary
considerations, and could not be bribed in any way.

Finally, Totski took cunning means to try to break his chains and
be free. He tried to tempt her in various ways to lose her heart; he
invited princes, hussars, secretaries of embassies, poets, novelists,
even Socialists, to see her; but not one of them all made the faintest
impression upon Nastasia. It was as though she had a pebble in place
of a heart, as though her feelings and affections were dried up and
withered for ever.

She lived almost entirely alone; she read, she studied, she loved music.
Her principal acquaintances were poor women of various grades, a couple
of actresses, and the family of a poor schoolteacher. Among these people
she was much beloved.

She received four or five friends sometimes, of an evening. Totski
often came. Lately, too, General Epanchin had been enabled with
great difficulty to introduce himself into her circle. Gania made
her acquaintance also, and others were Ferdishenko, an ill-bred, and
would-be witty, young clerk, and Ptitsin, a money-lender of modest
and polished manners, who had risen from poverty. In fact, Nastasia
Philipovna's beauty became a thing known to all the town; but not a
single man could boast of anything more than his own admiration for
her; and this reputation of hers, and her wit and culture and grace, all
confirmed Totski in the plan he had now prepared.

And it was at this moment that General Epanchin began to play so large
and important a part in the story.

When Totski had approached the general with his request for friendly
counsel as to a marriage with one of his daughters, he had made a full
and candid confession. He had said that he intended to stop at no means
to obtain his freedom; even if Nastasia were to promise to leave him
entirely alone in future, he would not (he said) believe and trust her;
words were not enough for him; he must have solid guarantees of some
sort. So he and the general determined to try what an attempt to appeal
to her heart would effect. Having arrived at Nastasia's house one day,
with Epanchin, Totski immediately began to speak of the intolerable
torment of his position. He admitted that he was to blame for all, but
candidly confessed that he could not bring himself to feel any remorse
for his original guilt towards herself, because he was a man of sensual
passions which were inborn and ineradicable, and that he had no power
over himself in this respect; but that he wished, seriously, to marry at
last, and that the whole fate of the most desirable social union which
he contemplated, was in her hands; in a word, he confided his all to her
generosity of heart.

General Epanchin took up his part and spoke in the character of father
of a family; he spoke sensibly, and without wasting words over any
attempt at sentimentality, he merely recorded his full admission of
her right to be the arbiter of Totski's destiny at this moment. He then
pointed out that the fate of his daughter, and very likely of both his
other daughters, now hung upon her reply.

To Nastasia's question as to what they wished her to do, Totski
confessed that he had been so frightened by her, five years ago, that
he could never now be entirely comfortable until she herself married. He
immediately added that such a suggestion from him would, of course, be
absurd, unless accompanied by remarks of a more pointed nature. He
very well knew, he said, that a certain young gentleman of good family,
namely, Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin, with whom she was acquainted,
and whom she received at her house, had long loved her passionately,
and would give his life for some response from her. The young fellow had
confessed this love of his to him (Totski) and had also admitted it in
the hearing of his benefactor, General Epanchin. Lastly, he could not
help being of opinion that Nastasia must be aware of Gania's love for
her, and if he (Totski) mistook not, she had looked with some favour
upon it, being often lonely, and rather tired of her present life.
Having remarked how difficult it was for him, of all people, to speak
to her of these matters, Totski concluded by saying that he trusted
Nastasia Philipovna would not look with contempt upon him if he now
expressed his sincere desire to guarantee her future by a gift of
seventy-five thousand roubles. He added that the sum would have been
left her all the same in his will, and that therefore she must not
consider the gift as in any way an indemnification to her for anything,
but that there was no reason, after all, why a man should not be allowed
to entertain a natural desire to lighten his conscience, etc., etc.; in
fact, all that would naturally be said under the circumstances. Totski
was very eloquent all through, and, in conclusion, just touched on the
fact that not a soul in the world, not even General Epanchin, had ever
heard a word about the above seventy-five thousand roubles, and that
this was the first time he had ever given expression to his intentions
in respect to them.

Nastasia Philipovna's reply to this long rigmarole astonished both the
friends considerably.

Not only was there no trace of her former irony, of her old hatred and
enmity, and of that dreadful laughter, the very recollection of which
sent a cold chill down Totski's back to this very day; but she seemed
charmed and really glad to have the opportunity of talking seriously
with him for once in a way. She confessed that she had long wished to
have a frank and free conversation and to ask for friendly advice, but
that pride had hitherto prevented her; now, however, that the ice was
broken, nothing could be more welcome to her than this opportunity.

First, with a sad smile, and then with a twinkle of merriment in her
eyes, she admitted that such a storm as that of five years ago was now
quite out of the question. She said that she had long since changed
her views of things, and recognized that facts must be taken into
consideration in spite of the feelings of the heart. What was done was
done and ended, and she could not understand why Totski should still
feel alarmed.

She next turned to General Epanchin and observed, most courteously, that
she had long since known of his daughters, and that she had heard none
but good report; that she had learned to think of them with deep and
sincere respect. The idea alone that she could in any way serve them,
would be to her both a pride and a source of real happiness.

It was true that she was lonely in her present life; Totski had judged
her thoughts aright. She longed to rise, if not to love, at least to
family life and new hopes and objects, but as to Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
she could not as yet say much. She thought it must be the case that he
loved her; she felt that she too might learn to love him, if she could
be sure of the firmness of his attachment to herself; but he was very
young, and it was a difficult question to decide. What she specially
liked about him was that he worked, and supported his family by his
toil.

She had heard that he was proud and ambitious; she had heard much that
was interesting of his mother and sister, she had heard of them from Mr.
Ptitsin, and would much like to make their acquaintance, but--another
question!--would they like to receive her into their house? At all
events, though she did not reject the idea of this marriage, she desired
not to be hurried. As for the seventy-five thousand roubles, Mr. Totski
need not have found any difficulty or awkwardness about the matter; she
quite understood the value of money, and would, of course, accept the
gift. She thanked him for his delicacy, however, but saw no reason why
Gavrila Ardalionovitch should not know about it.

She would not marry the latter, she said, until she felt persuaded that
neither on his part nor on the part of his family did there exist any
sort of concealed suspicions as to herself. She did not intend to ask
forgiveness for anything in the past, which fact she desired to be
known. She did not consider herself to blame for anything that had
happened in former years, and she thought that Gavrila Ardalionovitch
should be informed as to the relations which had existed between herself
and Totski during the last five years. If she accepted this money it was
not to be considered as indemnification for her misfortune as a young
girl, which had not been in any degree her own fault, but merely as
compensation for her ruined life.

She became so excited and agitated during all these explanations and
confessions that General Epanchin was highly gratified, and considered
the matter satisfactorily arranged once for all. But the once bitten
Totski was twice shy, and looked for hidden snakes among the flowers.
