you’ve been a long time coming here.”

“Tell me, how are things going?”

“Ilusha is very ill. He is certainly dying.”

“How awful! You must admit that medicine is a fraud, Karamazov,” cried
Kolya warmly.

“Ilusha has mentioned you often, very often, even in his sleep, in
delirium, you know. One can see that you used to be very, very dear to him
... before the incident ... with the knife.... Then there’s another
reason.... Tell me, is that your dog?”

“Yes, Perezvon.”

“Not Zhutchka?” Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity. “Is she
lost for ever?”

“I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka. I’ve heard all about it.”
Kolya smiled mysteriously. “Listen, Karamazov, I’ll tell you all about it.
That’s what I came for; that’s what I asked you to come out here for, to
explain the whole episode to you before we go in,” he began with
animation. “You see, Karamazov, Ilusha came into the preparatory class
last spring. Well, you know what our preparatory class is—a lot of small
boys. They began teasing Ilusha at once. I am two classes higher up, and,
of course, I only look on at them from a distance. I saw the boy was weak
and small, but he wouldn’t give in to them; he fought with them. I saw he
was proud, and his eyes were full of fire. I like children like that. And
they teased him all the more. The worst of it was he was horribly dressed
at the time, his breeches were too small for him, and there were holes in
his boots. They worried him about it; they jeered at him. That I can’t
stand. I stood up for him at once, and gave it to them hot. I beat them,
but they adore me, do you know, Karamazov?” Kolya boasted impulsively;
“but I am always fond of children. I’ve two chickens in my hands at home
now—that’s what detained me to‐day. So they left off beating Ilusha and I
took him under my protection. I saw the boy was proud. I tell you that,
the boy was proud; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me: he
did my slightest bidding, obeyed me as though I were God, tried to copy
me. In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once, and
I’d go about with him. On Sundays, too. They always laugh when an older
boy makes friends with a younger one like that; but that’s a prejudice. If
it’s my fancy, that’s enough. I am teaching him, developing him. Why
shouldn’t I develop him if I like him? Here you, Karamazov, have taken up
with all these nestlings. I see you want to influence the younger
generation—to develop them, to be of use to them, and I assure you this
trait in your character, which I knew by hearsay, attracted me more than
anything. Let us get to the point, though. I noticed that there was a sort
of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy, and you know I have a
positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality, and I have had it from a
baby. There were contradictions in him, too: he was proud, but he was
slavishly devoted to me, and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he’d
refuse to agree with me; he’d argue, fly into a rage. I used sometimes to
propound certain ideas; I could see that it was not so much that he
disagreed with the ideas, but that he was simply rebelling against me,
because I was cool in responding to his endearments. And so, in order to
train him properly, the tenderer he was, the colder I became. I did it on
purpose: that was my idea. My object was to form his character, to lick
him into shape, to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt, you
understand me at a word. Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession
he was downcast and dejected, not because of my coldness, but for
something else, something more important. I wondered what the tragedy was.
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know
Smerdyakov, who was footman to your late father—it was before his death,
of course—and he taught the little fool a silly trick—that is, a brutal,
nasty trick. He told him to take a piece of bread, to stick a pin in it,
and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without
biting it, and then to watch and see what would happen. So they prepared a
piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka, that shaggy dog there’s
been such a fuss about. The people of the house it belonged to never fed
it at all, though it barked all day. (Do you like that stupid barking,
Karamazov? I can’t stand it.) So it rushed at the bread, swallowed it, and
began to squeal; it turned round and round and ran away, squealing as it
ran out of sight. That was Ilusha’s own account of it. He confessed it to
me, and cried bitterly. He hugged me, shaking all over. He kept on
repeating ‘He ran away squealing’: the sight of that haunted him. He was
tormented by remorse, I could see that. I took it seriously. I determined
to give him a lesson for other things as well. So I must confess I wasn’t
quite straightforward, and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I
was. ‘You’ve done a nasty thing,’ I said, ‘you are a scoundrel. I won’t
tell of it, of course, but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a
time. I’ll think it over and let you know through Smurov’—that’s the boy
who’s just come with me; he’s always ready to do anything for me—‘whether
I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up
for good as a scoundrel.’ He was tremendously upset. I must own I felt I’d
gone too far as I spoke, but there was no help for it. I did what I
thought best at the time. A day or two after, I sent Smurov to tell him
that I would not speak to him again. That’s what we call it when two
schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another.
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then, if
I saw signs of repentance, to hold out my hand to him again. That was my
intention. But what do you think happened? He heard Smurov’s message, his
eyes flashed. ‘Tell Krassotkin from me,’ he cried, ‘that I will throw
bread with pins to all the dogs—all—all of them!’ ‘So he’s going in for a
little temper. We must smoke it out of him.’ And I began to treat him with
contempt; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically. And
just then that affair with his father happened. You remember? You must
realize that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already. The
boys, seeing I’d given him up, set on him and taunted him, shouting, ‘Wisp
of tow, wisp of tow!’ And he had soon regular skirmishes with them, which
I am very sorry for. They seem to have given him one very bad beating. One
day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school. I stood a few
yards off, looking on. And, I swear, I don’t remember that I laughed; it
was quite the other way, I felt awfully sorry for him, in another minute I
would have run up to take his part. But he suddenly met my eyes. I don’t
know what he fancied; but he pulled out a penknife, rushed at me, and
struck at my thigh, here in my right leg. I didn’t move. I don’t mind
owning I am plucky sometimes, Karamazov. I simply looked at him
contemptuously, as though to say, ‘This is how you repay all my kindness!
Do it again, if you like, I’m at your service.’ But he didn’t stab me
again; he broke down, he was frightened at what he had done, he threw away
the knife, burst out crying, and ran away. I did not sneak on him, of
course, and I made them all keep quiet, so it shouldn’t come to the ears
of the masters. I didn’t even tell my mother till it had healed up. And
the wound was a mere scratch. And then I heard that the same day he’d been
throwing stones and had bitten your finger—but you understand now what a
state he was in! Well, it can’t be helped: it was stupid of me not to come
and forgive him—that is, to make it up with him—when he was taken ill. I
am sorry for it now. But I had a special reason. So now I’ve told you all
about it ... but I’m afraid it was stupid of me.”

“Oh, what a pity,” exclaimed Alyosha, with feeling, “that I didn’t know
before what terms you were on with him, or I’d have come to you long ago
to beg you to go to him with me. Would you believe it, when he was
feverish he talked about you in delirium. I didn’t know how much you were
to him! And you’ve really not succeeded in finding that dog? His father
and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it. Would you believe
it, since he’s been ill, I’ve three times heard him repeat with tears,
‘It’s because I killed Zhutchka, father, that I am ill now. God is
punishing me for it.’ He can’t get that idea out of his head. And if the
dog were found and proved to be alive, one might almost fancy the joy
would cure him. We have all rested our hopes on you.”

“Tell me, what made you hope that I should be the one to find him?” Kolya
asked, with great curiosity. “Why did you reckon on me rather than any one
else?”

“There was a report that you were looking for the dog, and that you would
bring it when you’d found it. Smurov said something of the sort. We’ve all
been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive, that it’s been seen.
The boys brought him a live hare; he just looked at it, with a faint
smile, and asked them to set it free in the fields. And so we did. His
father has just this moment come back, bringing him a mastiff pup, hoping
to comfort him with that; but I think it only makes it worse.”

“Tell me, Karamazov, what sort of man is the father? I know him, but what
do you make of him—a mountebank, a buffoon?”

“Oh, no; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed.
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they
daren’t speak the truth, from having been for years humiliated and
intimidated by them. Believe me, Krassotkin, that sort of buffoonery is
sometimes tragic in the extreme. His whole life now is centered in Ilusha,
and if Ilusha dies, he will either go mad with grief or kill himself. I
feel almost certain of that when I look at him now.”

“I understand you, Karamazov. I see you understand human nature,” Kolya
added, with feeling.

“And as soon as I saw you with a dog, I thought it was Zhutchka you were
bringing.”

“Wait a bit, Karamazov, perhaps we shall find it yet; but this is
Perezvon. I’ll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more
than the mastiff pup. Wait a bit, Karamazov, you will know something in a
minute. But, I say, I am keeping you here!” Kolya cried suddenly. “You’ve
no overcoat on in this bitter cold. You see what an egoist I am. Oh, we
are all egoists, Karamazov!”

“Don’t trouble; it is cold, but I don’t often catch cold. Let us go in,
though, and, by the way, what is your name? I know you are called Kolya,
but what else?”

“Nikolay—Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin, or, as they say in official
documents, ‘Krassotkin son.’ ” Kolya laughed for some reason, but added
suddenly, “Of course I hate my name Nikolay.”

“Why so?”

“It’s so trivial, so ordinary.”

“You are thirteen?” asked Alyosha.

“No, fourteen—that is, I shall be fourteen very soon, in a fortnight. I’ll
confess one weakness of mine, Karamazov, just to you, since it’s our first
meeting, so that you may understand my character at once. I hate being
asked my age, more than that ... and in fact ... there’s a libelous story
going about me, that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys.
It’s a fact that I did play with them, but it’s a perfect libel to say I
did it for my own amusement. I have reasons for believing that you’ve
heard the story; but I wasn’t playing for my own amusement, it was for the
sake of the children, because they couldn’t think of anything to do by
themselves. But they’ve always got some silly tale. This is an awful town
for gossip, I can tell you.”

“But what if you had been playing for your own amusement, what’s the
harm?”

“Come, I say, for my own amusement! You don’t play horses, do you?”

“But you must look at it like this,” said Alyosha, smiling. “Grown‐up
people go to the theater and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes
are represented—sometimes there are robbers and battles, too—and isn’t
that just the same thing, in a different form, of course? And young
people’s games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in
its first stage. You know, they spring from the growing artistic instincts
of the young. And sometimes these games are much better than performances
in the theater, the only difference is that people go there to look at the
actors, while in these games the young people are the actors themselves.
But that’s only natural.”

“You think so? Is that your idea?” Kolya looked at him intently. “Oh, you
know, that’s rather an interesting view. When I go home, I’ll think it
over. I’ll admit I thought I might learn something from you. I’ve come to
learn of you, Karamazov,” Kolya concluded, in a voice full of spontaneous
feeling.

“And I of you,” said Alyosha, smiling and pressing his hand.

Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha. What struck him most was that he
treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he
were “quite grown up.”

“I’ll show you something directly, Karamazov; it’s a theatrical
performance, too,” he said, laughing nervously. “That’s why I’ve come.”

“Let us go first to the people of the house, on the left. All the boys
leave their coats in there, because the room is small and hot.”

“Oh, I’m only coming in for a minute. I’ll keep on my overcoat. Perezvon
will stay here in the passage and be dead. _Ici_, Perezvon, lie down and
be dead! You see how he’s dead. I’ll go in first and explore, then I’ll
whistle to him when I think fit, and you’ll see, he’ll dash in like mad.
Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment. I’ll arrange
it all and you’ll see something.”



Chapter V. By Ilusha’s Bedside


The room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is
already familiar to the reader. It was close and crowded at that moment
with a number of visitors. Several boys were sitting with Ilusha, and
though all of them, like Smurov, were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha
who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha, it was really the
fact. All the art he had used had been to take them, one by one, to
Ilusha, without “sheepish sentimentality,” appearing to do so casually and
without design. It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering. He
was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy
shown him by these boys, who had been his enemies. Krassotkin was the only
one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha’s heart. Perhaps
the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin, who
had been his one friend and protector. Clever little Smurov, who was the
first to make it up with Ilusha, thought it was so. But when Smurov hinted
to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something, the
latter cut him short, bidding Smurov tell “Karamazov” at once that he knew
best what to do, that he wanted no one’s advice, and that, if he went to
see Ilusha, he would choose his own time for he had “his own reasons.”

That was a fortnight before this Sunday. That was why Alyosha had not been
to see him, as he had meant to. But though he waited, he sent Smurov to
him twice again. Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt, impatient
refusal, sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more, that if he
came himself, he, Krassotkin, would not go to Ilusha at all. Up to the
very last day, Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that
morning, and only the evening before, as he parted from Smurov, Kolya
abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning, for he would go
with him to the Snegiryovs’, but warned him on no account to say he was
coming, as he wanted to drop in casually. Smurov obeyed. Smurov’s fancy
that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had
dropped that “they must be asses not to find the dog, if it was alive.”
When Smurov, waiting for an opportunity, timidly hinted at his guess about
the dog, Krassotkin flew into a violent rage. “I’m not such an ass as to
go hunting about the town for other people’s dogs when I’ve got a dog of
my own! And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a
pin? Sheepish sentimentality, that’s what it is!”

For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons
in the corner. He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and
bit his finger. He was taken ill the same day, though for a month
afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and
passage. But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without
help from his father. His father was terribly concerned about him. He even
gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die.
And often, especially after leading him round the room on his arm and
putting him back to bed, he would run to a dark corner in the passage and,
leaning his head against the wall, he would break into paroxysms of
violent weeping, stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha.

Returning to the room, he would usually begin doing something to amuse and
comfort his precious boy; he would tell him stories, funny anecdotes, or
would mimic comic people he had happened to meet, even imitate the howls
and cries of animals. But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling
and playing the buffoon. Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked
it, he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt,
and he was continually haunted by the memory of the “wisp of tow” and that
“terrible day.”

Nina, Ilusha’s gentle, crippled sister, did not like her father’s
buffoonery either (Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg
to study at the university). But the half‐imbecile mother was greatly
diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or
performing something. It was the only way she could be amused; all the
rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now every one had
forgotten her, that no one treated her with respect, that she was
slighted, and so on. But during the last few days she had completely
changed. She began looking constantly at Ilusha’s bed in the corner and
seemed lost in thought. She was more silent, quieter, and, if she cried,
she cried quietly so as not to be heard. The captain noticed the change in
her with mournful perplexity. The boys’ visits at first only angered her,
but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her, and at
last she liked them so much that, if the boys had given up coming, she
would have felt dreary without them. When the children told some story or
played a game, she laughed and clapped her hands. She called some of them
to her and kissed them. She was particularly fond of Smurov.

As for the captain, the presence in his room of the children, who came to
cheer up Ilusha, filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy. He
even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression, and that that
would hasten his recovery. In spite of his alarm about Ilusha, he had not,
till lately, felt one minute’s doubt of his boy’s ultimate recovery.

He met his little visitors with homage, waited upon them hand and foot; he
was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back,
but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up. He began buying
little things for them, gingerbread and nuts, gave them tea and cut them
sandwiches. It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money. He
had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha
had predicted he would. And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna, learning more
about their circumstances and Ilusha’s illness, visited them herself, made
the acquaintance of the family, and succeeded in fascinating the half‐
imbecile mother. Since then she had been lavish in helping them, and the
captain, terror‐stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying,
forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance.

All this time Doctor Herzenstube, who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna,
came punctually every other day, but little was gained by his visits and
he dosed the invalid mercilessly. But on that Sunday morning a new doctor
was expected, who had come from Moscow, where he had a great reputation.
Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense, not
expressly for Ilusha, but for another object of which more will be said in
its place hereafter. But, as he had come, she had asked him to see Ilusha
as well, and the captain had been told to expect him. He hadn’t the
slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming, though he had long wished
for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting.

At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room, the
captain and all the boys were round Ilusha’s bed, looking at a tiny
mastiff pup, which had only been born the day before, though the captain
had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha, who was still
fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka. Ilusha, who had heard
three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy, not an
ordinary puppy, but a pedigree mastiff (a very important point, of
course), tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased.
But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy only
served to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he had
killed. The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he, smiling sadly,
stroked it with his thin, pale, wasted hand. Clearly he liked the puppy,
but ... it wasn’t Zhutchka; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy,
too, then he would have been completely happy.

“Krassotkin!” cried one of the boys suddenly. He was the first to see him
come in.

Krassotkin’s entrance made a general sensation; the boys moved away and
stood on each side of the bed, so that he could get a full view of Ilusha.
The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya.

“Please come in ... you are welcome!” he said hurriedly. “Ilusha, Mr.
Krassotkin has come to see you!”

But Krassotkin, shaking hands with him hurriedly, instantly showed his
complete knowledge of the manners of good society. He turned first to the
captain’s wife sitting in her arm‐chair, who was very ill‐humored at the
moment, and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha’s bed
and did not let her see the new puppy. With the greatest courtesy he made
her a bow, scraping his foot, and turning to Nina, he made her, as the
only other lady present, a similar bow. This polite behavior made an
extremely favorable impression on the deranged lady.

“There, you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought
up,” she commented aloud, throwing up her hands; “but as for our other
visitors they come in one on the top of another.”

“How do you mean, mamma, one on the top of another, how is that?” muttered
the captain affectionately, though a little anxious on her account.

“That’s how they ride in. They get on each other’s shoulders in the
passage and prance in like that on a respectable family. Strange sort of
visitors!”

“But who’s come in like that, mamma?”

“Why, that boy came in riding on that one’s back and this one on that
one’s.”

Kolya was already by Ilusha’s bedside. The sick boy turned visibly paler.
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya. Kolya had not
seen his little friend for two months, and he was overwhelmed at the sight
of him. He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted, yellow
face, such enormous, feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands.
He saw, with grieved surprise, Ilusha’s rapid, hard breathing and dry
lips. He stepped close to him, held out his hand, and almost overwhelmed,
he said:

“Well, old man ... how are you?” But his voice failed him, he couldn’t
achieve an appearance of ease; his face suddenly twitched and the corners
of his mouth quivered. Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile, still unable
to utter a word. Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over
Ilusha’s hair.

“Never mind!” he murmured softly to him to cheer him up, or perhaps not
knowing why he said it. For a minute they were silent again.

“Hallo, so you’ve got a new puppy?” Kolya said suddenly, in a most callous
voice.

“Ye—es,” answered Ilusha in a long whisper, gasping for breath.

“A black nose, that means he’ll be fierce, a good house‐dog,” Kolya
observed gravely and stolidly, as if the only thing he cared about was the
puppy and its black nose. But in reality he still had to do his utmost to
control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child, and do what he
would he could not control it. “When it grows up, you’ll have to keep it
on the chain, I’m sure.”

“He’ll be a huge dog!” cried one of the boys.

“Of course he will,” “a mastiff,” “large,” “like this,” “as big as a
calf,” shouted several voices.

“As big as a calf, as a real calf,” chimed in the captain. “I got one like
that on purpose, one of the fiercest breed, and his parents are huge and
very fierce, they stand as high as this from the floor.... Sit down here,
on Ilusha’s bed, or here on the bench. You are welcome, we’ve been hoping
to see you a long time.... You were so kind as to come with Alexey
Fyodorovitch?”

Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed, at Ilusha’s feet. Though he had
perhaps prepared a free‐and‐easy opening for the conversation on his way,
now he completely lost the thread of it.

“No ... I came with Perezvon. I’ve got a dog now, called Perezvon. A
Slavonic name. He’s out there ... if I whistle, he’ll run in. I’ve brought
a dog, too,” he said, addressing Ilusha all at once. “Do you remember
Zhutchka, old man?” he suddenly fired the question at him.

Ilusha’s little face quivered. He looked with an agonized expression at
Kolya. Alyosha, standing at the door, frowned and signed to Kolya not to
speak of Zhutchka, but he did not or would not notice.

“Where ... is Zhutchka?” Ilusha asked in a broken voice.

“Oh, well, my boy, your Zhutchka’s lost and done for!”

Ilusha did not speak, but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya.
Alyosha, catching Kolya’s eye, signed to him vigorously again, but he
turned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed.

“It must have run away and died somewhere. It must have died after a meal
like that,” Kolya pronounced pitilessly, though he seemed a little
breathless. “But I’ve got a dog, Perezvon ... A Slavonic name.... I’ve
brought him to show you.”

“I don’t want him!” said Ilusha suddenly.

“No, no, you really must see him ... it will amuse you. I brought him on
purpose.... He’s the same sort of shaggy dog.... You allow me to call in
my dog, madam?” He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov, with inexplicable
excitement in his manner.

“I don’t want him, I don’t want him!” cried Ilusha, with a mournful break
in his voice. There was a reproachful light in his eyes.

“You’d better,” the captain started up from the chest by the wall on which
he had just sat down, “you’d better ... another time,” he muttered, but
Kolya could not be restrained. He hurriedly shouted to Smurov, “Open the
door,” and as soon as it was open, he blew his whistle. Perezvon dashed
headlong into the room.

“Jump, Perezvon, beg! Beg!” shouted Kolya, jumping up, and the dog stood
erect on its hind‐legs by Ilusha’s bedside. What followed was a surprise
to every one: Ilusha started, lurched violently forward, bent over
Perezvon and gazed at him, faint with suspense.

“It’s ... Zhutchka!” he cried suddenly, in a voice breaking with joy and
suffering.

“And who did you think it was?” Krassotkin shouted with all his might, in
a ringing, happy voice, and bending down he seized the dog and lifted him
up to Ilusha.

“Look, old man, you see, blind of one eye and the left ear is torn, just
the marks you described to me. It was by that I found him. I found him
directly. He did not belong to any one!” he explained, turning quickly to
the captain, to his wife, to Alyosha and then again to Ilusha. “He used to
live in the Fedotovs’ back‐yard. Though he made his home there, they did
not feed him. He was a stray dog that had run away from the village ... I
found him.... You see, old man, he couldn’t have swallowed what you gave
him. If he had, he must have died, he must have! So he must have spat it
out, since he is alive. You did not see him do it. But the pin pricked his
tongue, that is why he squealed. He ran away squealing and you thought
he’d swallowed it. He might well squeal, because the skin of dogs’ mouths
is so tender ... tenderer than in men, much tenderer!” Kolya cried
impetuously, his face glowing and radiant with delight. Ilusha could not
speak. White as a sheet, he gazed open‐mouthed at Kolya, with his great
eyes almost starting out of his head. And if Krassotkin, who had no
suspicion of it, had known what a disastrous and fatal effect such a
moment might have on the sick child’s health, nothing would have induced
him to play such a trick on him. But Alyosha was perhaps the only person
in the room who realized it. As for the captain he behaved like a small
child.

“Zhutchka! It’s Zhutchka!” he cried in a blissful voice, “Ilusha, this is
Zhutchka, your Zhutchka! Mamma, this is Zhutchka!” He was almost weeping.

“And I never guessed!” cried Smurov regretfully. “Bravo, Krassotkin! I
said he’d find the dog and here he’s found him.”

“Here he’s found him!” another boy repeated gleefully.

“Krassotkin’s a brick!” cried a third voice.

“He’s a brick, he’s a brick!” cried the other boys, and they began
clapping.

“Wait, wait,” Krassotkin did his utmost to shout above them all. “I’ll
tell you how it happened, that’s the whole point. I found him, I took him
home and hid him at once. I kept him locked up at home and did not show
him to any one till to‐day. Only Smurov has known for the last fortnight,
but I assured him this dog was called Perezvon and he did not guess. And
meanwhile I taught the dog all sorts of tricks. You should only see all
the things he can do! I trained him so as to bring you a well‐trained dog,
in good condition, old man, so as to be able to say to you, ‘See, old man,
what a fine dog your Zhutchka is now!’ Haven’t you a bit of meat? He’ll
show you a trick that will make you die with laughing. A piece of meat,
haven’t you got any?”

The captain ran across the passage to the landlady, where their cooking
was done. Not to lose precious time, Kolya, in desperate haste, shouted to
Perezvon, “Dead!” And the dog immediately turned round and lay on his back
with its four paws in the air. The boys laughed. Ilusha looked on with the
same suffering smile, but the person most delighted with the dog’s
performance was “mamma.” She laughed at the dog and began snapping her
fingers and calling it, “Perezvon, Perezvon!”

“Nothing will make him get up, nothing!” Kolya cried triumphantly, proud
of his success. “He won’t move for all the shouting in the world, but if I
call to him, he’ll jump up in a minute. Ici, Perezvon!” The dog leapt up
and bounded about, whining with delight. The captain ran back with a piece
of cooked beef.

“Is it hot?” Kolya inquired hurriedly, with a business‐like air, taking
the meat. “Dogs don’t like hot things. No, it’s all right. Look,
everybody, look, Ilusha, look, old man; why aren’t you looking? He does
not look at him, now I’ve brought him.”

The new trick consisted in making the dog stand motionless with his nose
out and putting a tempting morsel of meat just on his nose. The luckless
dog had to stand without moving, with the meat on his nose, as long as his
master chose to keep him, without a movement, perhaps for half an hour.
But he kept Perezvon only for a brief moment.

“Paid for!” cried Kolya, and the meat passed in a flash from the dog’s
nose to his mouth. The audience, of course, expressed enthusiasm and
surprise.

“Can you really have put off coming all this time simply to train the
dog?” exclaimed Alyosha, with an involuntary note of reproach in his
voice.

“Simply for that!” answered Kolya, with perfect simplicity. “I wanted to
show him in all his glory.”

“Perezvon! Perezvon,” called Ilusha suddenly, snapping his thin fingers
and beckoning to the dog.

“What is it? Let him jump up on the bed! _Ici_, Perezvon!” Kolya slapped
the bed and Perezvon darted up by Ilusha. The boy threw both arms round
his head and Perezvon instantly licked his cheek. Ilusha crept close to
him, stretched himself out in bed and hid his face in the dog’s shaggy
coat.

“Dear, dear!” kept exclaiming the captain. Kolya sat down again on the
edge of the bed.

“Ilusha, I can show you another trick. I’ve brought you a little cannon.
You remember, I told you about it before and you said how much you’d like
to see it. Well, here, I’ve brought it to you.”

And Kolya hurriedly pulled out of his satchel the little bronze cannon. He
hurried, because he was happy himself. Another time he would have waited
till the sensation made by Perezvon had passed off, now he hurried on
regardless of all consideration. “You are all happy now,” he felt, “so
here’s something to make you happier!” He was perfectly enchanted himself.

“I’ve been coveting this thing for a long while; it’s for you, old man,
it’s for you. It belonged to Morozov, it was no use to him, he had it from
his brother. I swopped a book from father’s book‐case for it, _A Kinsman
of Mahomet or Salutary Folly_, a scandalous book published in Moscow a
hundred years ago, before they had any censorship. And Morozov has a taste
for such things. He was grateful to me, too....”

Kolya held the cannon in his hand so that all could see and admire it.
Ilusha raised himself, and, with his right arm still round the dog, he
gazed enchanted at the toy. The sensation was even greater when Kolya
announced that he had gunpowder too, and that it could be fired off at
once “if it won’t alarm the ladies.” “Mamma” immediately asked to look at
the toy closer and her request was granted. She was much pleased with the
little bronze cannon on wheels and began rolling it to and fro on her lap.
She readily gave permission for the cannon to be fired, without any idea
of what she had been asked. Kolya showed the powder and the shot. The
captain, as a military man, undertook to load it, putting in a minute
quantity of powder. He asked that the shot might be put off till another
time. The cannon was put on the floor, aiming towards an empty part of the
room, three grains of powder were thrust into the touch‐hole and a match
was put to it. A magnificent explosion followed. Mamma was startled, but
at once laughed with delight. The boys gazed in speechless triumph. But
the captain, looking at Ilusha, was more enchanted than any of them. Kolya
picked up the cannon and immediately presented it to Ilusha, together with
the powder and the shot.

“I got it for you, for you! I’ve been keeping it for you a long time,” he
repeated once more in his delight.

“Oh, give it to me! No, give me the cannon!” mamma began begging like a
little child. Her face showed a piteous fear that she would not get it.
Kolya was disconcerted. The captain fidgeted uneasily.

“Mamma, mamma,” he ran to her, “the cannon’s yours, of course, but let
Ilusha have it, because it’s a present to him, but it’s just as good as
yours. Ilusha will always let you play with it; it shall belong to both of
you, both of you.”

“No, I don’t want it to belong to both of us, I want it to be mine
altogether, not Ilusha’s,” persisted mamma, on the point of tears.

“Take it, mother, here, keep it!” Ilusha cried. “Krassotkin, may I give it
to my mother?” he turned to Krassotkin with an imploring face, as though
he were afraid he might be offended at his giving his present to some one
else.

“Of course you may,” Krassotkin assented heartily, and, taking the cannon
from Ilusha, he handed it himself to mamma with a polite bow. She was so
touched that she cried.

“Ilusha, darling, he’s the one who loves his mamma!” she said tenderly,
and at once began wheeling the cannon to and fro on her lap again.

“Mamma, let me kiss your hand.” The captain darted up to her at once and
did so.

“And I never saw such a charming fellow as this nice boy,” said the
grateful lady, pointing to Krassotkin.

“And I’ll bring you as much powder as you like, Ilusha. We make the powder
ourselves now. Borovikov found out how it’s made—twenty‐four parts of
saltpeter, ten of sulphur and six of birchwood charcoal. It’s all pounded
together, mixed into a paste with water and rubbed through a tammy
sieve—that’s how it’s done.”

“Smurov told me about your powder, only father says it’s not real
gunpowder,” responded Ilusha.

“Not real?” Kolya flushed. “It burns. I don’t know, of course.”

“No, I didn’t mean that,” put in the captain with a guilty face. “I only
said that real powder is not made like that, but that’s nothing, it can be
made so.”

“I don’t know, you know best. We lighted some in a pomatum pot, it burned
splendidly, it all burnt away leaving only a tiny ash. But that was only
the paste, and if you rub it through ... but of course you know best, I
don’t know.... And Bulkin’s father thrashed him on account of our powder,
did you hear?” he turned to Ilusha.

“Yes,” answered Ilusha. He listened to Kolya with immense interest and
enjoyment.

“We had prepared a whole bottle of it and he used to keep it under his
bed. His father saw it. He said it might explode, and thrashed him on the
spot. He was going to make a complaint against me to the masters. He is
not allowed to go about with me now, no one is allowed to go about with me
now. Smurov is not allowed to either, I’ve got a bad name with every one.
They say I’m a ‘desperate character,’ ” Kolya smiled scornfully. “It all
began from what happened on the railway.”

“Ah, we’ve heard of that exploit of yours, too,” cried the captain. “How
could you lie still on the line? Is it possible you weren’t the least
afraid, lying there under the train? Weren’t you frightened?”

The captain was abject in his flattery of Kolya.

“N—not particularly,” answered Kolya carelessly. “What’s blasted my
reputation more than anything here was that cursed goose,” he said,
turning again to Ilusha. But though he assumed an unconcerned air as he
talked, he still could not control himself and was continually missing the
note he tried to keep up.

“Ah! I heard about the goose!” Ilusha laughed, beaming all over. “They
told me, but I didn’t understand. Did they really take you to the court?”

“The most stupid, trivial affair, they made a mountain of a molehill as
they always do,” Kolya began carelessly. “I was walking through the
market‐place here one day, just when they’d driven in the geese. I stopped
and looked at them. All at once a fellow, who is an errand‐boy at
Plotnikov’s now, looked at me and said, ‘What are you looking at the geese
for?’ I looked at him; he was a stupid, moon‐faced fellow of twenty. I am
always on the side of the peasantry, you know. I like talking to the
peasants.... We’ve dropped behind the peasants—that’s an axiom. I believe
you are laughing, Karamazov?”

“No, Heaven forbid, I am listening,” said Alyosha with a most good‐natured
air, and the sensitive Kolya was immediately reassured.

“My theory, Karamazov, is clear and simple,” he hurried on again, looking
pleased. “I believe in the people and am always glad to give them their
due, but I am not for spoiling them, that is a _sine qua non_ ... But I
was telling you about the goose. So I turned to the fool and answered, ‘I
am wondering what the goose thinks about.’ He looked at me quite stupidly,
‘And what does the goose think about?’ he asked. ‘Do you see that cart
full of oats?’ I said. ‘The oats are dropping out of the sack, and the
goose has put its neck right under the wheel to gobble them up—do you
see?’ ‘I see that quite well,’ he said. ‘Well,’ said I, ‘if that cart were
to move on a little, would it break the goose’s neck or not?’ ‘It’d be
sure to break it,’ and he grinned all over his face, highly delighted.
‘Come on, then,’ said I, ‘let’s try.’ ‘Let’s,’ he said. And it did not
take us long to arrange: he stood at the bridle without being noticed, and
I stood on one side to direct the goose. And the owner wasn’t looking, he
was talking to some one, so I had nothing to do, the goose thrust its head
in after the oats of itself, under the cart, just under the wheel. I
winked at the lad, he tugged at the bridle, and crack. The goose’s neck
was broken in half. And, as luck would have it, all the peasants saw us at
that moment and they kicked up a shindy at once. ‘You did that on
purpose!’ ‘No, not on purpose.’ ‘Yes, you did, on purpose!’ Well, they
shouted, ‘Take him to the justice of the peace!’ They took me, too. ‘You
were there, too,’ they said, ‘you helped, you’re known all over the
market!’ And, for some reason, I really am known all over the market,”
Kolya added conceitedly. “We all went off to the justice’s, they brought
the goose, too. The fellow was crying in a great funk, simply blubbering
like a woman. And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any number
of geese like that. Well, of course, there were witnesses. The justice of
the peace settled it in a minute, that the farmer was to be paid a rouble
for the goose, and the fellow to have the goose. And he was warned not to
play such pranks again. And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman. ‘It
wasn’t me,’ he said, ‘it was he egged me on,’ and he pointed to me. I
answered with the utmost composure that I hadn’t egged him on, that I
simply stated the general proposition, had spoken hypothetically. The
justice of the peace smiled and was vexed with himself at once for having
smiled. ‘I’ll complain to your masters of you, so that for the future you
mayn’t waste your time on such general propositions, instead of sitting at
your books and learning your lessons.’ He didn’t complain to the masters,
that was a joke, but the matter was noised abroad and came to the ears of
the masters. Their ears are long, you know! The classical master,
Kolbasnikov, was particularly shocked about it, but Dardanelov got me off
again. But Kolbasnikov is savage with every one now like a green ass. Did
you know, Ilusha, he is just married, got a dowry of a thousand roubles,
and his bride’s a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree.
The third‐class fellows wrote an epigram on it:


    Astounding news has reached the class,
    Kolbasnikov has been an ass.


And so on, awfully funny, I’ll bring it to you later on. I say nothing
against Dardanelov, he is a learned man, there’s no doubt about it. I
respect men like that and it’s not because he stood up for me.”

“But you took him down about the founders of Troy!” Smurov put in
suddenly, unmistakably proud of Krassotkin at such a moment. He was
particularly pleased with the story of the goose.

“Did you really take him down?” the captain inquired, in a flattering way.
“On the question who founded Troy? We heard of it, Ilusha told me about it
at the time.”

“He knows everything, father, he knows more than any of us!” put in
Ilusha; “he only pretends to be like that, but really he is top in every
subject....”

Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness.

“Oh, that’s all nonsense about Troy, a trivial matter. I consider this an
unimportant question,” said Kolya with haughty humility. He had by now
completely recovered his dignity, though he was still a little uneasy. He
felt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose,
for instance, with too little reserve, while Alyosha had looked serious
and had not said a word all the time. And the vain boy began by degrees to
have a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him, and
thought he was showing off before him. If he dared to think anything like
that Kolya would—

“I regard the question as quite a trivial one,” he rapped out again,
proudly.

“And I know who founded Troy,” a boy, who had not spoken before, said
suddenly, to the surprise of every one. He was silent and seemed to be
shy. He was a pretty boy of about eleven, called Kartashov. He was sitting
near the door. Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement.

The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secret
for the whole school, a secret which could only be discovered by reading
Smaragdov, and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya. One day, when Kolya’s back
was turned, Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov, which lay among Kolya’s
books, and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundation
of Troy. This was a good time ago, but he felt uneasy and could not bring
himself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy, afraid
of what might happen and of Krassotkin’s somehow putting him to shame over
it. But now he couldn’t resist saying it. For weeks he had been longing
to.

“Well, who did found it?” asked Kolya, turning to him with haughty
superciliousness. He saw from his face that he really did know and at once
made up his mind how to take it. There was, so to speak, a discordant note
in the general harmony.

“Troy was founded by Teucer, Dardanus, Ilius and Tros,” the boy rapped out
at once, and in the same instant he blushed, blushed so, that it was
painful to look at him. But the boys stared at him, stared at him for a
whole minute, and then all the staring eyes turned at once and were
fastened upon Kolya, who was still scanning the audacious boy with
disdainful composure.

“In what sense did they found it?” he deigned to comment at last. “And
what is meant by founding a city or a state? What do they do? Did they go
and each lay a brick, do you suppose?”

There was laughter. The offending boy turned from pink to crimson. He was
silent and on the point of tears. Kolya held him so for a minute.

“Before you talk of a historical event like the foundation of a
nationality, you must first understand what you mean by it,” he admonished
him in stern, incisive tones. “But I attach no consequence to these old
wives’ tales and I don’t think much of universal history in general,” he
added carelessly, addressing the company generally.

“Universal history?” the captain inquired, looking almost scared.

“Yes, universal history! It’s the study of the successive follies of
mankind and nothing more. The only subjects I respect are mathematics and
natural science,” said Kolya. He was showing off and he stole a glance at
Alyosha; his was the only opinion he was afraid of there. But Alyosha was
still silent and still serious as before. If Alyosha had said a word it
would have stopped him, but Alyosha was silent and “it might be the
silence of contempt,” and that finally irritated Kolya.

“The classical languages, too ... they are simply madness, nothing more.
You seem to disagree with me again, Karamazov?”

“I don’t agree,” said Alyosha, with a faint smile.

“The study of the classics, if you ask my opinion, is simply a police
measure, that’s simply why it has been introduced into our schools.” By
degrees Kolya began to get breathless again. “Latin and Greek were
introduced because they are a bore and because they stupefy the intellect.
It was dull before, so what could they do to make things duller? It was
senseless enough before, so what could they do to make it more senseless?
So they thought of Greek and Latin. That’s my opinion, I hope I shall
never change it,” Kolya finished abruptly. His cheeks were flushed.

“That’s true,” assented Smurov suddenly, in a ringing tone of conviction.
He had listened attentively.

“And yet he is first in Latin himself,” cried one of the group of boys
suddenly.

“Yes, father, he says that and yet he is first in Latin,” echoed Ilusha.

“What of it?” Kolya thought fit to defend himself, though the praise was
very sweet to him. “I am fagging away at Latin because I have to, because
I promised my mother to pass my examination, and I think that whatever you
do, it’s worth doing it well. But in my soul I have a profound contempt
for the classics and all that fraud.... You don’t agree, Karamazov?”

“Why ‘fraud’?” Alyosha smiled again.

“Well, all the classical authors have been translated into all languages,
so it was not for the sake of studying the classics they introduced Latin,
but solely as a police measure, to stupefy the intelligence. So what can
one call it but a fraud?”

“Why, who taught you all this?” cried Alyosha, surprised at last.

“In the first place I am capable of thinking for myself without being
taught. Besides, what I said just now about the classics being translated
our teacher Kolbasnikov has said to the whole of the third class.”

“The doctor has come!” cried Nina, who had been silent till then.

A carriage belonging to Madame Hohlakov drove up to the gate. The captain,
who had been expecting the doctor all the morning, rushed headlong out to
meet him. “Mamma” pulled herself together and assumed a dignified air.
Alyosha went up to Ilusha and began setting his pillows straight. Nina,
from her invalid chair, anxiously watched him putting the bed tidy. The
boys hurriedly took leave. Some of them promised to come again in the
evening. Kolya called Perezvon and the dog jumped off the bed.

“I won’t go away, I won’t go away,” Kolya said hastily to Ilusha. “I’ll
wait in the passage and come back when the doctor’s gone, I’ll come back
with Perezvon.”

But by now the doctor had entered, an important‐looking person with long,
dark whiskers and a shiny, shaven chin, wearing a bearskin coat. As he
crossed the threshold he stopped, taken aback; he probably fancied he had
come to the wrong place. “How is this? Where am I?” he muttered, not
removing his coat nor his peaked sealskin cap. The crowd, the poverty of
the room, the washing hanging on a line in the corner, puzzled him. The
captain, bent double, was bowing low before him.

“It’s here, sir, here, sir,” he muttered cringingly; “it’s here, you’ve
come right, you were coming to us...”

“Sne‐gi‐ryov?” the doctor said loudly and pompously. “Mr. Snegiryov—is
that you?”

“That’s me, sir!”

“Ah!”

The doctor looked round the room with a squeamish air once more and threw
off his coat, displaying to all eyes the grand decoration at his neck. The
captain caught the fur coat in the air, and the doctor took off his cap.

“Where is the patient?” he asked emphatically.



Chapter VI. Precocity


“What do you think the doctor will say to him?” Kolya asked quickly. “What
a repulsive mug, though, hasn’t he? I can’t endure medicine!”

“Ilusha is dying. I think that’s certain,” answered Alyosha, mournfully.

“They are rogues! Medicine’s a fraud! I am glad to have made your
acquaintance, though, Karamazov. I wanted to know you for a long time. I
am only sorry we meet in such sad circumstances.”

Kolya had a great inclination to say something even warmer and more
demonstrative, but he felt ill at ease. Alyosha noticed this, smiled, and
pressed his hand.

“I’ve long learned to respect you as a rare person,” Kolya muttered again,
faltering and uncertain. “I have heard you are a mystic and have been in
the monastery. I know you are a mystic, but ... that hasn’t put me off.
Contact with real life will cure you.... It’s always so with characters
like yours.”

“What do you mean by mystic? Cure me of what?” Alyosha was rather
astonished.

“Oh, God and all the rest of it.”

“What, don’t you believe in God?”

“Oh, I’ve nothing against God. Of course, God is only a hypothesis, but
... I admit that He is needed ... for the order of the universe and all
that ... and that if there were no God He would have to be invented,”
added Kolya, beginning to blush. He suddenly fancied that Alyosha might
think he was trying to show off his knowledge and to prove that he was
“grown up.” “I haven’t the slightest desire to show off my knowledge to
him,” Kolya thought indignantly. And all of a sudden he felt horribly
annoyed.

“I must confess I can’t endure entering on such discussions,” he said with
a final air. “It’s possible for one who doesn’t believe in God to love
mankind, don’t you think so? Voltaire didn’t believe in God and loved
mankind?” (“I am at it again,” he thought to himself.)

“Voltaire believed in God, though not very much, I think, and I don’t
think he loved mankind very much either,” said Alyosha quietly, gently,
and quite naturally, as though he were talking to some one of his own age,
or even older. Kolya was particularly struck by Alyosha’s apparent
diffidence about his opinion of Voltaire. He seemed to be leaving the
question for him, little Kolya, to settle.

“Have you read Voltaire?” Alyosha finished.

“No, not to say read.... But I’ve read _Candide_ in the Russian
translation ... in an absurd, grotesque, old translation ... (At it again!
again!)”

“And did you understand it?”

“Oh, yes, everything.... That is ... Why do you suppose I shouldn’t
understand it? There’s a lot of nastiness in it, of course.... Of course I
can understand that it’s a philosophical novel and written to advocate an
idea....” Kolya was getting mixed by now. “I am a Socialist, Karamazov, I
am an incurable Socialist,” he announced suddenly, apropos of nothing.

“A Socialist?” laughed Alyosha. “But when have you had time to become one?
Why, I thought you were only thirteen?”

Kolya winced.

“In the first place I am not thirteen, but fourteen, fourteen in a
fortnight,” he flushed angrily, “and in the second place I am at a
