The Project Gutenberg EBook of Title: The Idiot, by Fyodor Dostoyevsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Title: The Idiot

Author: Fyodor Dostoyevsky

Translator: Eva Martin

Posting Date: April 5, 2012 [EBook #2638]
Release Date: May, 2001
[Last Updated: January 6, 2015]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TITLE: THE IDIOT ***




Produced by Martin Adamson, David Widger, with corrections by Andrew Sly










THE IDIOT

By Fyodor Dostoyevsky


Translated by Eva Martin




PART I

I.

Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o'clock one morning,
a train on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching the latter
city at full speed. The morning was so damp and misty that it was only
with great difficulty that the day succeeded in breaking; and it was
impossible to distinguish anything more than a few yards away from the
carriage windows.

Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from
abroad; but the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly with
insignificant persons of various occupations and degrees, picked up at
the different stations nearer town. All of them seemed weary, and
most of them had sleepy eyes and a shivering expression, while their
complexions generally appeared to have taken on the colour of the fog
outside.

When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages
found themselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both
were rather poorly dressed, both had remarkable faces, and both were
evidently anxious to start a conversation. If they had but known why,
at this particular moment, they were both remarkable persons, they would
undoubtedly have wondered at the strange chance which had set them down
opposite to one another in a third-class carriage of the Warsaw Railway
Company.

One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with
black curling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad
and flat, and he had high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly
compressed into an impudent, ironical--it might almost be called a
malicious--smile; but his forehead was high and well formed, and atoned
for a good deal of the ugliness of the lower part of his face. A special
feature of this physiognomy was its death-like pallor, which gave to
the whole man an indescribably emaciated appearance in spite of his hard
look, and at the same time a sort of passionate and suffering expression
which did not harmonize with his impudent, sarcastic smile and
keen, self-satisfied bearing. He wore a large fur--or rather
astrachan--overcoat, which had kept him warm all night, while his
neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a Russian
November night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a
large cape to it--the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the
winter months in Switzerland or North Italy--was by no means adapted to
the long cold journey through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.

The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six or
twenty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very fair,
with a thin, pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were large
and blue, and had an intent look about them, yet that heavy expression
which some people affirm to be a peculiarity as well as evidence, of an
epileptic subject. His face was decidedly a pleasant one for all that;
refined, but quite colourless, except for the circumstance that at this
moment it was blue with cold. He held a bundle made up of an old faded
silk handkerchief that apparently contained all his travelling wardrobe,
and wore thick shoes and gaiters, his whole appearance being very
un-Russian.

His black-haired neighbour inspected these peculiarities, having nothing
better to do, and at length remarked, with that rude enjoyment of the
discomforts of others which the common classes so often show:

"Cold?"

"Very," said his neighbour, readily, "and this is a thaw, too. Fancy if
it had been a hard frost! I never thought it would be so cold in the old
country. I've grown quite out of the way of it."

"What, been abroad, I suppose?"

"Yes, straight from Switzerland."

"Wheugh! my goodness!" The black-haired young fellow whistled, and then
laughed.

The conversation proceeded. The readiness of the fair-haired young
man in the cloak to answer all his opposite neighbour's questions
was surprising. He seemed to have no suspicion of any impertinence
or inappropriateness in the fact of such questions being put to him.
Replying to them, he made known to the inquirer that he certainly had
been long absent from Russia, more than four years; that he had been
sent abroad for his health; that he had suffered from some strange
nervous malady--a kind of epilepsy, with convulsive spasms. His
interlocutor burst out laughing several times at his answers; and
more than ever, when to the question, "whether he had been cured?" the
patient replied:

"No, they did not cure me."

"Hey! that's it! You stumped up your money for nothing, and we
believe in those fellows, here!" remarked the black-haired individual,
sarcastically.

"Gospel truth, sir, Gospel truth!" exclaimed another passenger, a
shabbily dressed man of about forty, who looked like a clerk, and
possessed a red nose and a very blotchy face. "Gospel truth! All they do
is to get hold of our good Russian money free, gratis, and for nothing."

"Oh, but you're quite wrong in my particular instance," said the Swiss
patient, quietly. "Of course I can't argue the matter, because I
know only my own case; but my doctor gave me money--and he had very
little--to pay my journey back, besides having kept me at his own
expense, while there, for nearly two years."

"Why? Was there no one else to pay for you?" asked the black-haired one.

"No--Mr. Pavlicheff, who had been supporting me there, died a couple
of years ago. I wrote to Mrs. General Epanchin at the time (she is a
distant relative of mine), but she did not answer my letter. And so
eventually I came back."

"And where have you come to?"

"That is--where am I going to stay? I--I really don't quite know yet,
I--"

Both the listeners laughed again.

"I suppose your whole set-up is in that bundle, then?" asked the first.

"I bet anything it is!" exclaimed the red-nosed passenger, with
extreme satisfaction, "and that he has precious little in the luggage
van!--though of course poverty is no crime--we must remember that!"

It appeared that it was indeed as they had surmised. The young fellow
hastened to admit the fact with wonderful readiness.

"Your bundle has some importance, however," continued the clerk, when
they had laughed their fill (it was observable that the subject of their
mirth joined in the laughter when he saw them laughing); "for though I
dare say it is not stuffed full of friedrichs d'or and louis d'or--judge
from your costume and gaiters--still--if you can add to your possessions
such a valuable property as a relation like Mrs. General Epanchin, then
your bundle becomes a significant object at once. That is, of course, if
you really are a relative of Mrs. Epanchin's, and have not made a little
error through--well, absence of mind, which is very common to human
beings; or, say--through a too luxuriant fancy?"

"Oh, you are right again," said the fair-haired traveller, "for I
really am _almost_ wrong when I say she and I are related. She is hardly
a relation at all; so little, in fact, that I was not in the least
surprised to have no answer to my letter. I expected as much."

"H'm! you spent your postage for nothing, then. H'm! you are candid,
however--and that is commendable. H'm! Mrs. Epanchin--oh yes! a most
eminent person. I know her. As for Mr. Pavlicheff, who supported you in
Switzerland, I know him too--at least, if it was Nicolai Andreevitch
of that name? A fine fellow he was--and had a property of four thousand
souls in his day."

"Yes, Nicolai Andreevitch--that was his name," and the young fellow
looked earnestly and with curiosity at the all-knowing gentleman with
the red nose.

This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain class.
They are people who know everyone--that is, they know where a man is
employed, what his salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what money
his wife had, who are his cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc. These
men generally have about a hundred pounds a year to live on, and they
spend their whole time and talents in the amassing of this style of
knowledge, which they reduce--or raise--to the standard of a science.

During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man
had become very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted,
and evidently longed for the end of the journey. He was very absent;
he would appear to listen--and heard nothing; and he would laugh of a
sudden, evidently with no idea of what he was laughing about.

"Excuse me," said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the bundle,
rather suddenly; "whom have I the honour to be talking to?"

"Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin," replied the latter, with perfect
readiness.

"Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H'm! I don't know, I'm sure! I may
say I have never heard of such a person," said the clerk, thoughtfully.
"At least, the name, I admit, is historical. Karamsin must mention the
family name, of course, in his history--but as an individual--one never
hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays."

"Of course not," replied the prince; "there are none, except myself.
I believe I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have
always been a poor lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army. I
don't know how Mrs. Epanchin comes into the Muishkin family, but she is
descended from the Princess Muishkin, and she, too, is the last of her
line."

"And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over
there?" asked the black-haired passenger.

"Oh yes--I did learn a little, but--"

"I've never learned anything whatever," said the other.

"Oh, but I learned very little, you know!" added the prince, as though
excusing himself. "They could not teach me very much on account of my
illness."

"Do you know the Rogojins?" asked his questioner, abruptly.

"No, I don't--not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why, is that
your name?"

"Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin."

"Parfen Rogojin? dear me--then don't you belong to those very Rogojins,
perhaps--" began the clerk, with a very perceptible increase of civility
in his tone.

"Yes--those very ones," interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and with scant
courtesy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the
blotchy-faced passenger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks
direct to the prince.

"Dear me--is it possible?" observed the clerk, while his face assumed an
expression of great deference and servility--if not of absolute
alarm: "what, a son of that very Semen Rogojin--hereditary honourable
citizen--who died a month or so ago and left two million and a half of
roubles?"

"And how do _you_ know that he left two million and a half of roubles?"
asked Rogojin, disdainfully, and not deigning so much as to look at the
other. "However, it's true enough that my father died a month ago, and
that here am I returning from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly a boot
to my foot. They've treated me like a dog! I've been ill of fever at
Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor farthing of money, have I
received from my mother or my confounded brother!"

"And now you'll have a million roubles, at least--goodness gracious me!"
exclaimed the clerk, rubbing his hands.

"Five weeks since, I was just like yourself," continued Rogojin,
addressing the prince, "with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I
wore. I ran away from my father and came to Pskoff to my aunt's house,
where I caved in at once with fever, and he went and died while I was
away. All honour to my respected father's memory--but he uncommonly
nearly killed me, all the same. Give you my word, prince, if I hadn't
cut and run then, when I did, he'd have murdered me like a dog."

"I suppose you angered him somehow?" asked the prince, looking at the
millionaire with considerable curiosity. But though there may have been
something remarkable in the fact that this man was heir to millions of
roubles there was something about him which surprised and interested
the prince more than that. Rogojin, too, seemed to have taken up the
conversation with unusual alacrity it appeared that he was still in a
considerable state of excitement, if not absolutely feverish, and was
in real need of someone to talk to for the mere sake of talking, as
safety-valve to his agitation.

As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter--since the information as to
the identity of Rogojin--hung over him, seemed to be living on the
honey of his words and in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every
syllable as though it were a pearl of great price.

"Oh, yes; I angered him--I certainly did anger him," replied Rogojin.
"But what puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother couldn't do
anything--she's too old--and whatever brother Senka says is law for her!
But why couldn't he let me know? He sent a telegram, they say. What's
the good of a telegram? It frightened my aunt so that she sent it back
to the office unopened, and there it's been ever since! It's only thanks
to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all about it. He says my
brother cut off the gold tassels from my father's coffin, at night
'because they're worth a lot of money!' says he. Why, I can get him
sent off to Siberia for that alone, if I like; it's sacrilege. Here,
you--scarecrow!" he added, addressing the clerk at his side, "is it
sacrilege or not, by law?"

"Sacrilege, certainly--certainly sacrilege," said the latter.

"And it's Siberia for sacrilege, isn't it?"

"Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!"

"They will think that I'm still ill," continued Rogojin to the prince,
"but I sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and came away.
Aha, brother Senka, you'll have to open your gates and let me in, my
boy! I know he told tales about me to my father--I know that well enough
but I certainly did rile my father about Nastasia Philipovna that's very
sure, and that was my own doing."

"Nastasia Philipovna?" said the clerk, as though trying to think out
something.

"Come, you know nothing about _her_," said Rogojin, impatiently.

"And supposing I do know something?" observed the other, triumphantly.

"Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an impertinent
beast you are!" he added angrily. "I thought some creature like you
would hang on to me as soon as I got hold of my money."

"Oh, but I do know, as it happens," said the clerk in an aggravating
manner. "Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to reproach me,
your excellency, but what if I prove that I am right after all? Nastasia
Phillpovna's family name is Barashkoff--I know, you see--and she is a
very well known lady, indeed, and comes of a good family, too. She is
connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch, a man of considerable
property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great friend of
General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is."

"My eyes!" said Rogojin, really surprised at last. "The devil take the
fellow, how does he know that?"

"Why, he knows everything--Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month or
two with Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he
was knocking about--he's in the debtor's prison now--I was with him,
and he couldn't do a thing without Lebedeff; and I got to know Nastasia
Philipovna and several people at that time."

"Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don't mean to say that she and
Lihachof--" cried Rogojin, turning quite pale.

"No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!" said Lebedeff,
hastily. "Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski's the only man with any
chance there. Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at the French
theatre of an evening, and the officers and people all look at her and
say, 'By Jove, there's the famous Nastasia Philipovna!' but no one ever
gets any further than that, for there is nothing more to say."

"Yes, it's quite true," said Rogojin, frowning gloomily; "so Zaleshoff
told me. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day, prince, in my
father's old coat, when she suddenly came out of a shop and stepped
into her carriage. I swear I was all of a blaze at once. Then I met
Zaleshoff--looking like a hair-dresser's assistant, got up as fine as I
don't know who, while I looked like a tinker. 'Don't flatter yourself,
my boy,' said he; 'she's not for such as you; she's a princess, she
is, and her name is Nastasia Philipovna Barashkoff, and she lives
with Totski, who wishes to get rid of her because he's growing rather
old--fifty-five or so--and wants to marry a certain beauty, the
loveliest woman in all Petersburg.' And then he told me that I could
see Nastasia Philipovna at the opera-house that evening, if I liked, and
described which was her box. Well, I'd like to see my father allowing
any of us to go to the theatre; he'd sooner have killed us, any day.
However, I went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I
never slept a wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to
give me two government loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand
roubles each. 'Sell them,' said he, 'and then take seven thousand five
hundred roubles to the office, give them to the cashier, and bring me
back the rest of the ten thousand, without looking in anywhere on the
way; look sharp, I shall be waiting for you.' Well, I sold the bonds,
but I didn't take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I went
straight to the English shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a
diamond the size of a nut in each. They cost four hundred roubles more
than I had, so I gave my name, and they trusted me. With the earrings
I went at once to Zaleshoff's. 'Come on!' I said, 'come on to Nastasia
Philipovna's,' and off we went without more ado. I tell you I hadn't a
notion of what was about me or before me or below my feet all the way;
I saw nothing whatever. We went straight into her drawing-room, and then
she came out to us.

"I didn't say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: 'From Parfen
Rogojin, in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind
as to accept these!'

"She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.

"'Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,' says she, and
bowed and went off. Why didn't I die there on the spot? The worst of it
all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit of it! I
was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and
never said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all
in the fashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing and
scraping; and I bet anything she took him for me all the while!

"'Look here now,' I said, when we came out, 'none of your interference
here after this-do you understand?' He laughed: 'And how are you going
to settle up with your father?' says he. I thought I might as well jump
into the Neva at once without going home first; but it struck me that I
wouldn't, after all, and I went home feeling like one of the damned."

"My goodness!" shivered the clerk. "And his father," he added, for the
prince's instruction, "and his father would have given a man a ticket to
the other world for ten roubles any day--not to speak of ten thousand!"

The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than
ever at this moment.

"What do you know about it?" cried the latter. "Well, my father learned
the whole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the town
besides. So he took me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for an
hour. 'This is only a foretaste,' says he; 'wait a bit till night comes,
and I'll come back and talk to you again.'

"Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastasia
Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering
and beseeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after
awhile she brought the box and flew out at him. 'There,' she says,
'take your earrings, you wretched old miser; although they are ten times
dearer than their value to me now that I know what it must have cost
Parfen to get them! Give Parfen my compliments,' she says, 'and thank
him very much!' Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five roubles from
a friend, and off I went to Pskoff to my aunt's. The old woman there
lectured me so that I left the house and went on a drinking tour round
the public-houses of the place. I was in a high fever when I got to
Pskoff, and by nightfall I was lying delirious in the streets somewhere
or other!"

"Oho! we'll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!" giggled
Lebedeff, rubbing his hands with glee. "Hey, my boy, we'll get her some
proper earrings now! We'll get her such earrings that--"

"Look here," cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm, "look here,
if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I'll tan your hide as
sure as you sit there!"

"Aha! do--by all means! if you tan my hide you won't turn me away from
your society. You'll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever. Ha, ha!
here we are at the station, though."

Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.

Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large
collection of friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with
profuse waving of hats and shouting.

"Why, there's Zaleshoff here, too!" he muttered, gazing at the scene
with a sort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly turned
to the prince: "Prince, I don't know why I have taken a fancy to you;
perhaps because I met you just when I did. But no, it can't be that, for
I met this fellow" (nodding at Lebedeff) "too, and I have not taken a
fancy to him by any means. Come to see me, prince; we'll take off those
gaiters of yours and dress you up in a smart fur coat, the best we
can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best quality, white waistcoat,
anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of money. Come, and
you shall go with me to Nastasia Philipovna's. Now then will you come or
no?"

"Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch" said Lebedef solemnly; "don't
let it slip! Accept, quick!"

Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he
replied with some cordiality:

"I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for
taking a fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time,
for I tell you frankly that I like you very much too. I liked you
especially when you told us about the diamond earrings; but I liked you
before that as well, though you have such a dark-clouded sort of face.
Thanks very much for the offer of clothes and a fur coat; I certainly
shall require both clothes and coat very soon. As for money, I have
hardly a copeck about me at this moment."

"You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so
come along!"

"That's true enough, he'll have lots before evening!" put in Lebedeff.

"But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let's know that
first?" asked Rogojin.

"Oh no, oh no!" said the prince; "I couldn't, you know--my illness--I
hardly ever saw a soul."

"H'm! well--here, you fellow-you can come along with me now if you
like!" cried Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the carriage.

Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin's
friends towards the Voznesensky, while the prince's route lay towards
the Litaynaya. It was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of
passers-by, and finding that he was a couple of miles or so from his
destination, he determined to take a droshky.

II.

General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya. Besides this
large residence--five-sixths of which was let in flats and lodgings-the
general was owner of another enormous house in the Sadovaya bringing in
even more rent than the first. Besides these houses he had a delightful
little estate just out of town, and some sort of factory in another part
of the city. General Epanchin, as everyone knew, had a good deal to
do with certain government monopolies; he was also a voice, and an
important one, in many rich public companies of various descriptions;
in fact, he enjoyed the reputation of being a well-to-do man of busy
habits, many ties, and affluent means. He had made himself indispensable
in several quarters, amongst others in his department of the government;
and yet it was a known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch Epanchin was a man of
no education whatever, and had absolutely risen from the ranks.

This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the
general; and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own
little weaknesses-very excusable ones,--one of which was a dislike to
any allusion to the above circumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For
instance, he made a point of never asserting himself when he would
gain more by keeping in the background; and in consequence many exalted
personages valued him principally for his humility and simplicity, and
because "he knew his place." And yet if these good people could only
have had a peep into the mind of this excellent fellow who "knew his
place" so well! The fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the world
and his really remarkable abilities, he always liked to appear to be
carrying out other people's ideas rather than his own. And also, his
luck seldom failed him, even at cards, for which he had a passion that
he did not attempt to conceal. He played for high stakes, and moved,
altogether, in very varied society.

As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is,
about fifty-five years of age,--the flowering time of existence, when
real enjoyment of life begins. His healthy appearance, good colour,
sound, though discoloured teeth, sturdy figure, preoccupied air during
business hours, and jolly good humour during his game at cards in the
evening, all bore witness to his success in life, and combined to make
existence a bed of roses to his excellency. The general was lord of a
flourishing family, consisting of his wife and three grown-up daughters.
He had married young, while still a lieutenant, his wife being a girl of
about his own age, who possessed neither beauty nor education, and who
brought him no more than fifty souls of landed property, which
little estate served, however, as a nest-egg for far more important
accumulations. The general never regretted his early marriage, or
regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so respected and
feared his wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs. Epanchin came of
the princely stock of Muishkin, which if not a brilliant, was, at all
events, a decidedly ancient family; and she was extremely proud of her
descent.

With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long
union very happily. While still young the wife had been able to make
important friends among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family
descent, and partly by her own exertions; while, in after life, thanks
to their wealth and to the position of her husband in the service, she
took her place among the higher circles as by right.

During these last few years all three of the general's
daughters--Alexandra, Adelaida, and Aglaya--had grown up and matured. Of
course they were only Epanchins, but their mother's family was noble;
they might expect considerable fortunes; their father had hopes of
attaining to very high rank indeed in his country's service-all of which
was satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty, even
the eldest, Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The middle
daughter was now twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was twenty.
This youngest girl was absolutely a beauty, and had begun of late to
attract considerable attention in society. But this was not all, for
every one of the three was clever, well educated, and accomplished.

It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very fond
of one another, and supported each other in every way; it was even said
that the two elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake of
the idol of the household, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked
asserting themselves, but were actually retiring. Certainly no one could
blame them for being too arrogant or haughty, and yet everybody was well
aware that they were proud and quite understood their own value. The
eldest was musical, while the second was a clever artist, which fact
she had concealed until lately. In a word, the world spoke well of the
girls; but they were not without their enemies, and occasionally people
talked with horror of the number of books they had read.

They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not
too keen about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone
was well aware of the hopes and aims of their parents.

It was about eleven o'clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the
bell at General Epanchin's door. The general lived on the first floor
or flat of the house, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A
liveried servant opened the door, and the prince was obliged to enter
into long explanations with this gentleman, who, from the first glance,
looked at him and his bundle with grave suspicion. At last, however, on
the repeated positive assurance that he really was Prince Muishkin, and
must absolutely see the general on business, the bewildered domestic
showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a waiting-room that
adjoined the general's study, there handing him over to another servant,
whose duty it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning, and
announce visitors to the general. This second individual wore a dress
coat, and was some forty years of age; he was the general's special
study servant, and well aware of his own importance.

"Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here," said the
door-keeper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the
ante-chamber. He looked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter
settled himself in another chair alongside, with his bundle on his
knees.

"If you don't mind, I would rather sit here with you," said the prince;
"I should prefer it to sitting in there."

"Oh, but you can't stay here. You are a visitor--a guest, so to speak.
Is it the general himself you wish to see?"

The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabby-looking
visitor, and had decided to ask once more.

"Yes--I have business--" began the prince.

"I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to
announce you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that."

The man's suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was
too unlike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general
certainly did receive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men, yet
in spite of this fact the servant felt great doubts on the subject
of this particular visitor. The presence of the secretary as an
intermediary was, he judged, essential in this case.

"Surely you--are from abroad?" he inquired at last, in a confused sort
of way. He had begun his sentence intending to say, "Surely you are not
Prince Muishkin, are you?"

"Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, 'Surely you
are not Prince Muishkin?' just now, but refrained out of politeness?"

"H'm!" grunted the astonished servant.

"I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for
me. As to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there's
nothing surprising in that--the fact is, my circumstances are not
particularly rosy at this moment."

"H'm!--no, I'm not afraid of that, you see; I have to announce you,
that's all. The secretary will be out directly-that is, unless you--yes,
that's the rub--unless you--come, you must allow me to ask you--you've
not come to beg, have you?"

"Oh dear no, you can be perfectly easy on that score. I have quite
another matter on hand."

"You must excuse my asking, you know. Your appearance led me to
think--but just wait for the secretary; the general is busy now, but the
secretary is sure to come out."

"Oh--well, look here, if I have some time to wait, would you mind
telling me, is there any place about where I could have a smoke? I have
my pipe and tobacco with me."

"_Smoke?_" said the man, in shocked but disdainful surprise, blinking his
eyes at the prince as though he could not believe his senses. "No, sir,
you cannot smoke here, and I wonder you are not ashamed of the very
suggestion. Ha, ha! a cool idea that, I declare!"

"Oh, I didn't mean in this room! I know I can't smoke here, of course.
I'd adjourn to some other room, wherever you like to show me to. You
see, I'm used to smoking a good deal, and now I haven't had a puff for
three hours; however, just as you like."

"Now how on earth am I to announce a man like that?" muttered the
servant. "In the first place, you've no right in here at all; you ought
to be in the waiting-room, because you're a sort of visitor--a guest, in
fact--and I shall catch it for this. Look here, do you intend to take up
you abode with us?" he added, glancing once more at the prince's bundle,
which evidently gave him no peace.

"No, I don't think so. I don't think I should stay even if they were
to invite me. I've simply come to make their acquaintance, and nothing
more."

"Make their acquaintance?" asked the man, in amazement, and with
redoubled suspicion. "Then why did you say you had business with the
general?"

"Oh well, very little business. There is one little matter--some
advice I am going to ask him for; but my principal object is simply to
introduce myself, because I am Prince Muishkin, and Madame Epanchin is
the last of her branch of the house, and besides herself and me there
are no other Muishkins left."

"What--you're a relation then, are you?" asked the servant, so
bewildered that he began to feel quite alarmed.

"Well, hardly so. If you stretch a point, we are relations, of course,
but so distant that one cannot really take cognizance of it. I once
wrote to your mistress from abroad, but she did not reply. However, I
have thought it right to make acquaintance with her on my arrival. I am
telling you all this in order to ease your mind, for I see you are still
far from comfortable on my account. All you have to do is to announce me
as Prince Muishkin, and the object of my visit will be plain enough. If
I am received--very good; if not, well, very good again. But they are
sure to receive me, I should think; Madame Epanchin will naturally be
curious to see the only remaining representative of her family. She
values her Muishkin descent very highly, if I am rightly informed."

The prince's conversation was artless and confiding to a degree, and
the servant could not help feeling that as from visitor to common
serving-man this state of things was highly improper. His conclusion was
that one of two things must be the explanation--either that this was a
begging impostor, or that the prince, if prince he were, was simply a
fool, without the slightest ambition; for a sensible prince with any
ambition would certainly not wait about in ante-rooms with servants, and
talk of his own private affairs like this. In either case, how was he to
announce this singular visitor?

"I really think I must request you to step into the next room!" he said,
with all the insistence he could muster.

"Why? If I had been sitting there now, I should not have had the
opportunity of making these personal explanations. I see you are still
uneasy about me and keep eyeing my cloak and bundle. Don't you think
you might go in yourself now, without waiting for the secretary to come
out?"

"No, no! I can't announce a visitor like yourself without the secretary.
Besides the general said he was not to be disturbed--he is with the
Colonel C--. Gavrila Ardalionovitch goes in without announcing."

"Who may that be? a clerk?"

"What? Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Oh no; he belongs to one of the
companies. Look here, at all events put your bundle down, here."

"Yes, I will if I may; and--can I take off my cloak"

"Of course; you can't go in _there_ with it on, anyhow."

The prince rose and took off his mantle, revealing a neat enough morning
costume--a little worn, but well made. He wore a steel watch chain and
from this chain there hung a silver Geneva watch. Fool the prince might
be, still, the general's servant felt that it was not correct for him to
continue to converse thus with a visitor, in spite of the fact that the
prince pleased him somehow.

"And what time of day does the lady receive?" the latter asked,
reseating himself in his old place.

"Oh, that's not in _my_ province! I believe she receives at any time; it
depends upon the visitors. The dressmaker goes in at eleven. Gavrila
Ardalionovitch is allowed much earlier than other people, too; he is
even admitted to early lunch now and then."

"It is much warmer in the rooms here than it is abroad at this season,"
observed the prince; "but it is much warmer there out of doors. As for
the houses--a Russian can't live in them in the winter until he gets
accustomed to them."

"Don't they heat them at all?"

"Well, they do heat them a little; but the houses and stoves are so
different to ours."

"H'm! were you long away?"

"Four years! and I was in the same place nearly all the time,--in one
village."

"You must have forgotten Russia, hadn't you?"

"Yes, indeed I had--a good deal; and, would you believe it, I often
wonder at myself for not having forgotten how to speak Russian? Even
now, as I talk to you, I keep saying to myself 'how well I am speaking
it.' Perhaps that is partly why I am so talkative this morning. I assure
you, ever since yesterday evening I have had the strongest desire to go
on and on talking Russian."

"H'm! yes; did you live in Petersburg in former years?"

This good flunkey, in spite of his conscientious scruples, really could
not resist continuing such a very genteel and agreeable conversation.

"In Petersburg? Oh no! hardly at all, and now they say so much is
changed in the place that even those who did know it well are obliged to
relearn what they knew. They talk a good deal about the new law courts,
and changes there, don't they?"

"H'm! yes, that's true enough. Well now, how is the law over there, do
they administer it more justly than here?"

"Oh, I don't know about that! I've heard much that is good about our
legal administration, too. There is no capital punishment here for one
thing."

"Is there over there?"

"Yes--I saw an execution in France--at Lyons. Schneider took me over
with him to see it."

"What, did they hang the fellow?"

"No, they cut off people's heads in France."

"What did the fellow do?--yell?"

"Oh no--it's the work of an instant. They put a man inside a frame and
a sort of broad knife falls by machinery--they call the thing a
guillotine--it falls with fearful force and weight--the head springs
off so quickly that you can't wink your eye in between. But all the
preparations are so dreadful. When they announce the sentence, you know,
and prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart him off to the
scaffold--that's the fearful part of the business. The people all crowd
round--even women--though they don't at all approve of women looking on."

"No, it's not a thing for women."

"Of course not--of course not!--bah! The criminal was a fine intelligent
fearless man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell you--believe it or
not, as you like--that when that man stepped upon the scaffold he _cried_,
he did indeed,--he was as white as a bit of paper. Isn't it a dreadful
idea that he should have cried--cried! Whoever heard of a grown man
crying from fear--not a child, but a man who never had cried before--a
grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must have been going on in
that man's mind at such a moment; what dreadful convulsions his whole
spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul that's what it
is. Because it is said 'thou shalt not kill,' is he to be killed because
he murdered some one else? No, it is not right, it's an impossible
theory. I assure you, I saw the sight a month ago and it's dancing
before my eyes to this moment. I dream of it, often."

The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour
suffused his pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever.
The servant followed his words with sympathetic interest. Clearly he
was not at all anxious to bring the conversation to an end. Who knows?
Perhaps he too was a man of imagination and with some capacity for
thought.

"Well, at all events it is a good thing that there's no pain when the
poor fellow's head flies off," he remarked.

"Do you know, though," cried the prince warmly, "you made that remark
now, and everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed with
the purpose of avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought came
into my head then: what if it be a bad plan after all? You may laugh at
my idea, perhaps--but I could not help its occurring to me all the same.
Now with the rack and tortures and so on--you suffer terrible pain of
course; but then your torture is bodily pain only (although no doubt you
have plenty of that) until you die. But _here_ I should imagine the
most terrible part of the whole punishment is, not the bodily pain at
all--but the certain knowledge that in an hour,--then in ten minutes,
then in half a minute, then now--this very _instant_--your soul must
quit your body and that you will no longer be a man--and that this
is certain, _certain_! That's the point--the certainty of it. Just that
instant when you place your head on the block and hear the iron grate
over your head--then--that quarter of a second is the most awful of all.

"This is not my own fantastical opinion--many people have thought the
same; but I feel it so deeply that I'll tell you what I think. I believe
that to execute a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably more
dreadfully than is equivalent to his crime. A murder by sentence is
far more dreadful than a murder committed by a criminal. The man who is
attacked by robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere, undoubtedly
hopes and hopes that he may yet escape until the very moment of his
death. There are plenty of instances of a man running away, or imploring
for mercy--at all events hoping on in some degree--even after his throat
was cut. But in the case of an execution, that last hope--having which
it is so immeasurably less dreadful to die,--is taken away from the
wretch and _certainty_ substituted in its place! There is his sentence,
and with it that terrible certainty that he cannot possibly escape
death--which, I consider, must be the most dreadful anguish in the
world. You may place a soldier before a cannon's mouth in battle, and
fire upon him--and he will still hope. But read to that same soldier his
death-sentence, and he will either go mad or burst into tears. Who dares
to say that any man can suffer this without going mad? No, no! it is
an abuse, a shame, it is unnecessary--why should such a thing exist?
Doubtless there may be men who have been sentenced, who have suffered
this mental anguish for a while and then have been reprieved; perhaps
such men may have been able to relate their feelings afterwards. Our
Lord Christ spoke of this anguish and dread. No! no! no! No man should
be treated so, no man, no man!"

The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this
as the prince did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly
conciliated, as was evident from the increased amiability of his
expression. "If you are really very anxious for a smoke," he remarked,
"I think it might possibly be managed, if you are very quick about it.
You see they might come out and inquire for you, and you wouldn't be on
the spot. You see that door there? Go in there and you'll find a little
room on the right; you can smoke there, only open the window, because I
ought not to allow it really, and--." But there was no time, after all.

A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle
of papers in his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his
overcoat. The new arrival glanced at the prince out of the corners of
his eyes.

"This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," began the man,
confidentially and almost familiarly, "that he is Prince Muishkin and
a relative of Madame Epanchin's. He has just arrived from abroad, with
nothing but a bundle by way of luggage--."

The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant
continued his communication in a whisper.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince
with great curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped
hurriedly towards the prince.

"Are you Prince Muishkin?" he asked, with the greatest courtesy and
amiability.

He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers,
fair and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most
intelligent. Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little
thin, if I may so call it, and showed his teeth too evenly; his
gaze though decidedly good-humoured and ingenuous, was a trifle too
inquisitive and intent to be altogether agreeable.

"Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles
at all!" thought the prince.

He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had
told the footman and Rogojin beforehand.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall
something.

"Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago--from
Switzerland, I think it was--to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs. Epanchin)?"

"It was."

"Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see
the general? I'll tell him at once--he will be free in a minute; but
you--you had better wait in the ante-chamber,--hadn't you? Why is he
here?" he added, severely, to the man.

"I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!"

At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a
portfolio under his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding
good-bye to someone inside, took his departure.

"You there, Gania?" cried a voice from the study, "come in here, will
you?"

Gavrila Ardalionovitch nodded to the prince and entered the room
hastily.

A couple of minutes later the door opened again and the affable voice of
Gania cried:

"Come in please, prince!"

III.

General Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was standing in the middle of the
room, and gazed with great curiosity at the prince as he entered. He
even advanced a couple of steps to meet him.

The prince came forward and introduced himself.

"Quite so," replied the general, "and what can I do for you?"

"Oh, I have no special business; my principal object was to make your
acquaintance. I should not like to disturb you. I do not know your times
and arrangements here, you see, but I have only just arrived. I came
straight from the station. I am come direct from Switzerland."

The general very nearly smiled, but thought better of it and kept his
smile back. Then he reflected, blinked his eyes, stared at his guest
once more from head to foot; then abruptly motioned him to a chair, sat
down himself, and waited with some impatience for the prince to speak.

Gania stood at his table in the far corner of the room, turning over
papers.

"I have not much time for making acquaintances, as a rule," said the
general, "but as, of course, you have your object in coming, I--"

"I felt sure you would think I had some object in view when I resolved
to pay you this visit," the prince interrupted; "but I give you my word,
beyond the pleasure of making your acquaintance I had no personal object
whatever."

"The pleasure is, of course, mutual; but life is not all pleasure, as
you are aware. There is such a thing as business, and I really do not
see what possible reason there can be, or what we have in common to--"

"Oh, there is no reason, of course, and I suppose there is nothing in
common between us, or very little; for if I am Prince Muishkin, and your
wife happens to be a member of my house, that can hardly be called a
