"You see, I have lost my manners. I agree that I have none, nor yet any
dignity. I will tell you why. I set no store upon such things.
Everything in me has undergone a cheek. You know the reason. I have not
a single human thought in my head. For a long while I have been
ignorant of what is going on in the world--here or in Russia. I have
been to Dresden, yet am completely in the dark as to what Dresden is
like. You know the cause of my obsession. I have no hope now, and am a
mere cipher in your eyes; wherefore, I tell you outright that wherever
I go I see only you--all the rest is a matter of indifference.

"Why or how I have come to love you I do not know. It may be that you
are not altogether fair to look upon. Do you know, I am ignorant even
as to what your face is like. In all probability, too, your heart is
not comely, and it is possible that your mind is wholly ignoble."

"And because you do not believe in my nobility of soul you think to
purchase me with money?" she said.

"WHEN have I thought to do so?" was my reply.

"You are losing the thread of the argument. If you do not wish to
purchase me, at all events you wish to purchase my respect."

"Not at all. I have told you that I find it difficult to explain
myself. You are hard upon me. Do not be angry at my chattering. You
know why you ought not to be angry with me--that I am simply an
imbecile. However, I do not mind if you ARE angry. Sitting in my room,
I need but to think of you, to imagine to myself the rustle of your
dress, and at once I fall almost to biting my hands. Why should you be
angry with me? Because I call myself your slave? Revel, I pray you, in
my slavery--revel in it. Do you know that sometimes I could kill
you?--not because I do not love you, or am jealous of you, but, because
I feel as though I could simply devour you... You are laughing!"

"No, I am not," she retorted. "But I order you, nevertheless, to be
silent."

She stopped, well nigh breathless with anger. God knows, she may not
have been a beautiful woman, yet I loved to see her come to a halt like
this, and was therefore, the more fond of arousing her temper. Perhaps
she divined this, and for that very reason gave way to rage. I said as
much to her.

"What rubbish!" she cried with a shudder.

"I do not care," I continued. "Also, do you know that it is not safe
for us to take walks together? Often I have a feeling that I should
like to strike you, to disfigure you, to strangle you. Are you certain
that it will never come to that? You are driving me to frenzy. Am I
afraid of a scandal, or of your anger? Why should I fear your anger? I
love without hope, and know that hereafter I shall love you a thousand
times more. If ever I should kill you I should have to kill myself too.
But I shall put off doing so as long as possible, for I wish to
continue enjoying the unbearable pain which your coldness gives me. Do
you know a very strange thing? It is that, with every day, my love for
you increases--though that would seem to be almost an impossibility.
Why should I not become a fatalist? Remember how, on the third day that
we ascended the Shlangenberg, I was moved to whisper in your ear: 'Say
but the word, and I will leap into the abyss.' Had you said it, I
should have leapt. Do you not believe me?"

"What stupid rubbish!" she cried.

"I care not whether it be wise or stupid," I cried in return. "I only
know that in your presence I must speak, speak, speak. Therefore, I am
speaking. I lose all conceit when I am with you, and everything ceases
to matter."

"Why should I have wanted you to leap from the Shlangenberg?" she said
drily, and (I think) with wilful offensiveness. "THAT would have been
of no use to me."

"Splendid!" I shouted. "I know well that you must have used the words
'of no use' in order to crush me. I can see through you. 'Of no use,'
did you say? Why, to give pleasure is ALWAYS of use; and, as for
barbarous, unlimited power--even if it be only over a fly--why, it is a
kind of luxury. Man is a despot by nature, and loves to torture. You,
in particular, love to do so."

I remember that at this moment she looked at me in a peculiar way. The
fact is that my face must have been expressing all the maze of
senseless, gross sensations which were seething within me. To this day
I can remember, word for word, the conversation as I have written it
down. My eyes were suffused with blood, and the foam had caked itself
on my lips. Also, on my honour I swear that, had she bidden me cast
myself from the summit of the Shlangenberg, I should have done it. Yes,
had she bidden me in jest, or only in contempt and with a spit in my
face, I should have cast myself down.

"Oh no! Why so? I believe you," she said, but in such a manner--in the
manner of which, at times, she was a mistress--and with such a note of
disdain and viperish arrogance in her tone, that God knows I could have
killed her.

Yes, at that moment she stood in peril. I had not lied to her about
that.

"Surely you are not a coward?" suddenly she asked me.

"I do not know," I replied. "Perhaps I am, but I do not know. I have
long given up thinking about such things."

"If I said to you, 'Kill that man,' would you kill him?"

"Whom?"

"Whomsoever I wish?"

"The Frenchman?"

"Do not ask me questions; return me answers. I repeat, whomsoever I
wish? I desire to see if you were speaking seriously just now."

She awaited my reply with such gravity and impatience that I found the
situation unpleasant.

"Do YOU, rather, tell me," I said, "what is going on here? Why do you
seem half-afraid of me? I can see for myself what is wrong. You are the
step-daughter of a ruined and insensate man who is smitten with love
for this devil of a Blanche. And there is this Frenchman, too, with his
mysterious influence over you. Yet, you actually ask me such a
question! If you do not tell me how things stand, I shall have to put
in my oar and do something. Are you ashamed to be frank with me? Are
you shy of me?"

"I am not going to talk to you on that subject. I have asked you a
question, and am waiting for an answer."

"Well, then--I will kill whomsoever you wish," I said. "But are you
REALLY going to bid me do such deeds?"

"Why should you think that I am going to let you off? I shall bid you
do it, or else renounce me. Could you ever do the latter? No, you know
that you couldn't. You would first kill whom I had bidden you, and then
kill ME for having dared to send you away!"

Something seemed to strike upon my brain as I heard these words. Of
course, at the time I took them half in jest and half as a challenge;
yet, she had spoken them with great seriousness. I felt thunderstruck
that she should so express herself, that she should assert such a right
over me, that she should assume such authority and say outright:
"Either you kill whom I bid you, or I will have nothing more to do with
you." Indeed, in what she had said there was something so cynical and
unveiled as to pass all bounds. For how could she ever regard me as the
same after the killing was done? This was more than slavery and
abasement; it was sufficient to bring a man back to his right senses.
Yet, despite the outrageous improbability of our conversation, my heart
shook within me.

Suddenly, she burst out laughing. We were seated on a bench near the
spot where the children were playing--just opposite the point in the
alley-way before the Casino where the carriages drew up in order to set
down their occupants.

"Do you see that fat Baroness?" she cried. "It is the Baroness
Burmergelm. She arrived three days ago. Just look at her husband--that
tall, wizened Prussian there, with the stick in his hand. Do you
remember how he stared at us the other day? Well, go to the Baroness,
take off your hat to her, and say something in French."

"Why?"

"Because you have sworn that you would leap from the Shlangenberg for
my sake, and that you would kill any one whom I might bid you kill.
Well, instead of such murders and tragedies, I wish only for a good
laugh. Go without answering me, and let me see the Baron give you a
sound thrashing with his stick."

"Then you throw me out a challenge?--you think that I will not do it?"

"Yes, I do challenge you. Go, for such is my will."

"Then I WILL go, however mad be your fancy. Only, look here: shall you
not be doing the General a great disservice, as well as, through him, a
great disservice to yourself? It is not about myself I am worrying--it
is about you and the General. Why, for a mere fancy, should I go and
insult a woman?"

"Ah! Then I can see that you are only a trifler," she said
contemptuously. "Your eyes are swimming with blood--but only because
you have drunk a little too much at luncheon. Do I not know that what I
have asked you to do is foolish and wrong, and that the General will be
angry about it? But I want to have a good laugh, all the same. I want
that, and nothing else. Why should you insult a woman, indeed? Well,
you will be given a sound thrashing for so doing."

I turned away, and went silently to do her bidding. Of course the thing
was folly, but I could not get out of it. I remember that, as I
approached the Baroness, I felt as excited as a schoolboy. I was in a
frenzy, as though I were drunk.



VI

Two days have passed since that day of lunacy. What a noise and a fuss
and a chattering and an uproar there was! And what a welter of
unseemliness and disorder and stupidity and bad manners! And I the
cause of it all! Yet part of the scene was also ridiculous--at all
events to myself it was so. I am not quite sure what was the matter
with me--whether I was merely stupefied or whether I purposely broke
loose and ran amok. At times my mind seems all confused; while at other
times I seem almost to be back in my childhood, at the school desk, and
to have done the deed simply out of mischief.

It all came of Polina--yes, of Polina. But for her, there might never
have been a fracas. Or perhaps I did the deed in a fit of despair
(though it may be foolish of me to think so)? What there is so
attractive about her I cannot think. Yet there IS something attractive
about her--something passing fair, it would seem. Others besides myself
she has driven to distraction. She is tall and straight, and very slim.
Her body looks as though it could be tied into a knot, or bent double,
like a cord. The imprint of her foot is long and narrow. It is, a
maddening imprint--yes, simply a maddening one! And her hair has a
reddish tint about it, and her eyes are like cat's eyes--though able
also to glance with proud, disdainful mien. On the evening of my first
arrival, four months ago, I remember that she was sitting and holding
an animated conversation with De Griers in the salon. And the way in
which she looked at him was such that later, when I retired to my own
room upstairs, I kept fancying that she had smitten him in the
face--that she had smitten him right on the cheek, so peculiar had been
her look as she stood confronting him. Ever since that evening I have
loved her.

But to my tale.

I stepped from the path into the carriage-way, and took my stand in the
middle of it. There I awaited the Baron and the Baroness. When they
were but a few paces distant from me I took off my hat, and bowed.

I remember that the Baroness was clad in a voluminous silk dress, pale
grey in colour, and adorned with flounces and a crinoline and train.
Also, she was short and inordinately stout, while her gross, flabby
chin completely concealed her neck. Her face was purple, and the little
eyes in it had an impudent, malicious expression. Yet she walked as
though she were conferring a favour upon everybody by so doing. As for
the Baron, he was tall, wizened, bony-faced after the German fashion,
spectacled, and, apparently, about forty-five years of age. Also, he
had legs which seemed to begin almost at his chest--or, rather, at his
chin! Yet, for all his air of peacock-like conceit, his clothes sagged
a little, and his face wore a sheepish air which might have passed for
profundity.

These details I noted within a space of a few seconds.

At first my bow and the fact that I had my hat in my hand barely caught
their attention. The Baron only scowled a little, and the Baroness
swept straight on.

"Madame la Baronne," said I, loudly and distinctly--embroidering each
word, as it were--"j'ai l'honneur d'etre votre esclave."

Then I bowed again, put on my hat, and walked past the Baron with a
rude smile on my face.

Polina had ordered me merely to take off my hat: the bow and the
general effrontery were of my own invention. God knows what instigated
me to perpetrate the outrage! In my frenzy I felt as though I were
walking on air.

"Hein!" ejaculated--or, rather, growled--the Baron as he turned towards
me in angry surprise.

I too turned round, and stood waiting in pseudo-courteous expectation.
Yet still I wore on my face an impudent smile as I gazed at him. He
seemed to hesitate, and his brows contracted to their utmost limits.
Every moment his visage was growing darker. The Baroness also turned in
my direction, and gazed at me in wrathful perplexity, while some of the
passers-by also began to stare at us, and others of them halted
outright.

"Hein!" the Baron vociferated again, with a redoubled growl and a note
of growing wrath in his voice.

"Ja wohl!" I replied, still looking him in the eyes.

"Sind sie rasend?" he exclaimed, brandishing his stick, and,
apparently, beginning to feel nervous. Perhaps it was my costume which
intimidated him, for I was well and fashionably dressed, after the
manner of a man who belongs to indisputably good society.

"Ja wo-o-ohl!" cried I again with all my might with a longdrawn rolling
of the "ohl" sound after the fashion of the Berliners (who constantly
use the phrase "Ja wohl!" in conversation, and more or less prolong the
syllable "ohl" according as they desire to express different shades of
meaning or of mood).

At this the Baron and the Baroness faced sharply about, and almost fled
in their alarm. Some of the bystanders gave vent to excited
exclamations, and others remained staring at me in astonishment. But I
do not remember the details very well.

Wheeling quietly about, I returned in the direction of Polina
Alexandrovna. But, when I had got within a hundred paces of her seat, I
saw her rise and set out with the children towards the hotel.

At the portico I caught up to her.

"I have perpetrated the--the piece of idiocy," I said as I came level
with her.

"Have you? Then you can take the consequences," she replied without so
much as looking at me. Then she moved towards the staircase.

I spent the rest of the evening walking in the park. Thence I passed
into the forest, and walked on until I found myself in a neighbouring
principality. At a wayside restaurant I partook of an omelette and some
wine, and was charged for the idyllic repast a thaler and a half.

Not until eleven o'clock did I return home--to find a summons awaiting
me from the General.

Our party occupied two suites in the hotel; each of which contained two
rooms. The first (the larger suite) comprised a salon and a
smoking-room, with, adjoining the latter, the General's study. It was
here that he was awaiting me as he stood posed in a majestic attitude
beside his writing-table. Lolling on a divan close by was De Griers.

"My good sir," the General began, "may I ask you what this is that you
have gone and done?"

"I should be glad," I replied, "if we could come straight to the point.
Probably you are referring to my encounter of today with a German?"

"With a German? Why, the German was the Baron Burmergelm--a most
important personage! I hear that you have been rude both to him and to
the Baroness?"

"No, I have not."

"But I understand that you simply terrified them, my good sir?" shouted
the General.

"Not in the least," I replied. "You must know that when I was in Berlin
I frequently used to hear the Berliners repeat, and repellently
prolong, a certain phrase--namely, 'Ja wohl!'; and, happening to meet
this couple in the carriage-drive, I found, for some reason or another,
that this phrase suddenly recurred to my memory, and exercised a
rousing effect upon my spirits. Moreover, on the three previous
occasions that I have met the Baroness she has walked towards me as
though I were a worm which could easily be crushed with the foot. Not
unnaturally, I too possess a measure of self-respect; wherefore, on
THIS occasion I took off my hat, and said politely (yes, I assure you
it was said politely): 'Madame, j'ai l'honneur d'etre votre esclave.'
Then the Baron turned round, and said 'Hein!'; whereupon I felt moved
to ejaculate in answer 'Ja wohl!' Twice I shouted it at him--the first
time in an ordinary tone, and the second time with the greatest
prolonging of the words of which I was capable. That is all."

I must confess that this puerile explanation gave me great pleasure. I
felt a strong desire to overlay the incident with an even added measure
of grossness; so, the further I proceeded, the more did the gusto of my
proceeding increase.

"You are only making fun of me!" vociferated the General as, turning to
the Frenchman, he declared that my bringing about of the incident had
been gratuitous. De Griers smiled contemptuously, and shrugged his
shoulders.

"Do not think THAT," I put in. "It was not so at all. I grant you that
my behaviour was bad--I fully confess that it was so, and make no
secret of the fact. I would even go so far as to grant you that my
behaviour might well be called stupid and indecent tomfoolery; but,
MORE than that it was not. Also, let me tell you that I am very sorry
for my conduct. Yet there is one circumstance which, in my eyes, almost
absolves me from regret in the matter. Of late--that is to say, for the
last two or three weeks--I have been feeling not at all well. That is
to say, I have been in a sick, nervous, irritable, fanciful condition,
so that I have periodically lost control over myself. For instance, on
more than one occasion I have tried to pick a quarrel even with
Monsieur le Marquise here; and, under the circumstances, he had no
choice but to answer me. In short, I have recently been showing signs
of ill-health. Whether the Baroness Burmergelm will take this
circumstance into consideration when I come to beg her pardon (for I do
intend to make her amends) I do not know; but I doubt if she will, and
the less so since, so far as I know, the circumstance is one which, of
late, has begun to be abused in the legal world, in that advocates in
criminal cases have taken to justifying their clients on the ground
that, at the moment of the crime, they (the clients) were unconscious
of what they were doing--that, in short, they were out of health. 'My
client committed the murder--that is true; but he has no recollection
of having committed it.' And doctors actually support these advocates
by affirming that there really is such a malady--that there really can
arise temporary delusions which make a man remember nothing of a given
deed, or only a half or a quarter of it! But the Baron and Baroness are
members of an older generation, as well as Prussian Junkers and
landowners. To them such a process in the medico-judicial world will be
unknown, and therefore, they are the more unlikely to accept any such
explanation. What is YOUR opinion about it, General?"

"Enough, sir!" he thundered with barely restrained fury. "Enough, I
say! Once and for all I must endeavour to rid myself of you and your
impertinence. To justify yourself in the eyes of the Baron and Baroness
will be impossible. Any intercourse with you, even though it be
confined to a begging of their pardons, they would look upon as a
degradation. I may tell you that, on learning that you formed part of,
my household, the Baron approached me in the Casino, and demanded of me
additional satisfaction. Do you understand, then, what it is that you
have entailed upon me--upon ME, my good sir? You have entailed upon me
the fact of my being forced to sue humbly to the Baron, and to give him
my word of honour that this very day you shall cease to belong to my
establishment!"

"Excuse me, General," I interrupted, "but did he make an express point
of it that I should 'cease to belong to your establishment,' as you
call it?"

"No; I, of my own initiative, thought that I ought to afford him that
satisfaction; and, with it he was satisfied. So we must part, good sir.
It is my duty to hand over to you forty gulden, three florins, as per
the accompanying statement. Here is the money, and here the account,
which you are at liberty to verify. Farewell. From henceforth we are
strangers. From you I have never had anything but trouble and
unpleasantness. I am about to call the landlord, and explain to him
that from tomorrow onwards I shall no longer be responsible for your
hotel expenses. Also I have the honour to remain your obedient servant."

I took the money and the account (which was indicted in pencil), and,
bowing low to the General, said to him very gravely:

"The matter cannot end here. I regret very much that you should have
been put to unpleasantness at the Baron's hands; but, the fault (pardon
me) is your own. How came you to answer for me to the Baron? And what
did you mean by saying that I formed part of your household? I am
merely your family tutor--not a son of yours, nor yet your ward, nor a
person of any kind for whose acts you need be responsible. I am a
judicially competent person, a man of twenty-five years of age, a
university graduate, a gentleman, and, until I met yourself, a complete
stranger to you. Only my boundless respect for your merits restrains me
from demanding satisfaction at your hands, as well as a further
explanation as to the reasons which have led you to take it upon
yourself to answer for my conduct."

So struck was he with my words that, spreading out his hands, he turned
to the Frenchman, and interpreted to him that I had challenged himself
(the General) to a duel. The Frenchman laughed aloud.

"Nor do I intend to let the Baron off," I continued calmly, but with
not a little discomfiture at De Griers' merriment. "And since you,
General, have today been so good as to listen to the Baron's
complaints, and to enter into his concerns--since you have made
yourself a participator in the affair--I have the honour to inform you
that, tomorrow morning at the latest, I shall, in my own name, demand
of the said Baron a formal explanation as to the reasons which have led
him to disregard the fact that the matter lies between him and myself
alone, and to put a slight upon me by referring it to another person,
as though I were unworthy to answer for my own conduct."

Then there happened what I had foreseen. The General on hearing of this
further intended outrage, showed the white feather.

"What?" he cried. "Do you intend to go on with this damned nonsense? Do
you not realise the harm that it is doing me? I beg of you not to laugh
at me, sir--not to laugh at me, for we have police authorities here
who, out of respect for my rank, and for that of the Baron...  In
short, sir, I swear to you that I will have you arrested, and marched
out of the place, to prevent any further brawling on your part. Do you
understand what I say?" He was almost breathless with anger, as well as
in a terrible fright.

"General," I replied with that calmness which he never could abide,
"one cannot arrest a man for brawling until he has brawled. I have not
so much as begun my explanations to the Baron, and you are altogether
ignorant as to the form and time which my intended procedure is likely
to assume. I wish but to disabuse the Baron of what is, to me, a
shameful supposition--namely, that I am under the guardianship of a
person who is qualified to exercise control over my free will. It is
vain for you to disturb and alarm yourself."

"For God's sake, Alexis Ivanovitch, do put an end to this senseless
scheme of yours!" he muttered, but with a sudden change from a
truculent tone to one of entreaty as he caught me by the hand. "Do you
know what is likely to come of it? Merely further unpleasantness. You
will agree with me, I am sure, that at present I ought to move with
especial care--yes, with very especial care. You cannot be fully aware
of how I am situated. When we leave this place I shall be ready to
receive you back into my household; but, for the time being I-- Well, I
cannot tell you all my reasons." With that he wound up in a despairing
voice: "O Alexis Ivanovitch, Alexis Ivanovitch!"

I moved towards the door--begging him to be calm, and promising that
everything should be done decently and in order; whereafter I departed.

Russians, when abroad, are over-apt to play the poltroon, to watch all
their words, and to wonder what people are thinking of their conduct,
or whether such and such a thing is 'comme il faut.' In short, they are
over-apt to cosset themselves, and to lay claim to great importance.
Always they prefer the form of behaviour which has once and for all
become accepted and established. This they will follow slavishly
whether in hotels, on promenades, at meetings, or when on a journey.
But the General had avowed to me that, over and above such
considerations as these, there were circumstances which compelled him
to "move with especial care at present", and that the fact had actually
made him poor-spirited and a coward--it had made him altogether change
his tone towards me. This fact I took into my calculations, and duly
noted it, for, of course, he MIGHT apply to the authorities tomorrow,
and it behoved me to go carefully.

Yet it was not the General but Polina that I wanted to anger. She had
treated me with such cruelty, and had got me into such a hole, that I
felt a longing to force her to beseech me to stop. Of course, my
tomfoolery might compromise her; yet certain other feelings and desires
had begun to form themselves in my brain. If I was never to rank in her
eyes as anything but a nonentity, it would not greatly matter if I
figured as a draggle-tailed cockerel, and the Baron were to give me a
good thrashing; but, the fact was that I desired to have the laugh of
them all, and to come out myself unscathed. Let people see what they
WOULD see. Let Polina, for once, have a good fright, and be forced to
whistle me to heel again. But, however much she might whistle, she
should see that I was at least no draggle-tailed cockerel!

      *      *      *      *      *

I have just received a surprising piece of news. I have just met our
chambermaid on the stairs, and been informed by her that Maria
Philipovna departed today, by the night train, to stay with a cousin at
Carlsbad. What can that mean? The maid declares that Madame packed her
trunks early in the day. Yet how is it that no one else seems to have
been aware of the circumstance? Or is it that I have been the only
person to be unaware of it? Also, the maid has just told me that, three
days ago, Maria Philipovna had some high words with the General. I
understand, then! Probably the words were concerning Mlle. Blanche.
Certainly something decisive is approaching.



VII

In the morning I sent for the maitre d'hotel, and explained to him
that, in future, my bill was to be rendered to me personally. As a
matter of fact, my expenses had never been so large as to alarm me, nor
to lead me to quit the hotel; while, moreover, I still had 160 gulden
left to me, and--in them--yes, in them, perhaps, riches awaited me. It
was a curious fact, that, though I had not yet won anything at play, I
nevertheless acted, thought, and felt as though I were sure, before
long, to become wealthy--since I could not imagine myself otherwise.

Next, I bethought me, despite the earliness of the hour, of going to
see Mr. Astley, who was staying at the Hotel de l'Angleterre (a
hostelry at no great distance from our own). But suddenly De Griers
entered my room. This had never before happened, for of late that
gentleman and I had stood on the most strained and distant of terms--he
attempting no concealment of his contempt for me (he even made an
express, point of showing it), and I having no reason to desire his
company. In short, I detested him. Consequently, his entry at the
present moment the more astounded me. At once I divined that something
out of the way was on the carpet.

He entered with marked affability, and began by complimenting me on my
room. Then, perceiving that I had my hat in my hands, he inquired
whither I was going so early; and, no sooner did he hear that I was
bound for Mr. Astley's than he stopped, looked grave, and seemed
plunged in thought.

He was a true Frenchman insofar as that, though he could be lively and
engaging when it suited him, he became insufferably dull and wearisome
as soon as ever the need for being lively and engaging had passed.
Seldom is a Frenchman NATURALLY civil: he is civil only as though to
order and of set purpose. Also, if he thinks it incumbent upon him to
be fanciful, original, and out of the way, his fancy always assumes a
foolish, unnatural vein, for the reason that it is compounded of trite,
hackneyed forms. In short, the natural Frenchman is a conglomeration of
commonplace, petty, everyday positiveness, so that he is the most
tedious person in the world.--Indeed, I believe that none but
greenhorns and excessively Russian people feel an attraction towards
the French; for, to any man of sensibility, such a compendium of
outworn forms--a compendium which is built up of drawing-room manners,
expansiveness, and gaiety--becomes at once over-noticeable and
unbearable.

"I have come to see you on business," De Griers began in a very
off-hand, yet polite, tone; "nor will I seek to conceal from you the
fact that I have come in the capacity of an emissary, of an
intermediary, from the General. Having small knowledge of the Russian
tongue, I lost most of what was said last night; but, the General has
now explained matters, and I must confess that--"

"See here, Monsieur de Griers," I interrupted. "I understand that you
have undertaken to act in this affair as an intermediary. Of course I
am only 'un utchitel,' a tutor, and have never claimed to be an
intimate of this household, nor to stand on at all familiar terms with
it. Consequently, I do not know the whole of its circumstances. Yet
pray explain to me this: have you yourself become one of its members,
seeing that you are beginning to take such a part in everything, and
are now present as an intermediary?"

The Frenchman seemed not over-pleased at my question. It was one which
was too outspoken for his taste--and he had no mind to be frank with me.

"I am connected with the General," he said drily, "partly through
business affairs, and partly through special circumstances. My
principal has sent me merely to ask you to forego your intentions of
last evening. What you contemplate is, I have no doubt, very clever;
yet he has charged me to represent to you that you have not the
slightest chance of succeeding in your end, since not only will the
Baron refuse to receive you, but also he (the Baron) has at his
disposal every possible means for obviating further unpleasantness from
you. Surely you can see that yourself? What, then, would be the good of
going on with it all? On the other hand, the General promises that at
the first favourable opportunity he will receive you back into his
household, and, in the meantime, will credit you with your salary--with
'vos appointements.' Surely that will suit you, will it not?"

Very quietly I replied that he (the Frenchman) was labouring under a
delusion; that perhaps, after all, I should not be expelled from the
Baron's presence, but, on the contrary, be listened to; finally, that I
should be glad if Monsieur de Griers would confess that he was now
visiting me merely in order to see how far I intended to go in the
affair.

"Good heavens!" cried de Griers. "Seeing that the General takes such an
interest in the matter, is there anything very unnatural in his
desiring also to know your plans?"

Again I began my explanations, but the Frenchman only fidgeted and
rolled his head about as he listened with an expression of manifest and
unconcealed irony on his face. In short, he adopted a supercilious
attitude. For my own part, I endeavoured to pretend that I took the
affair very seriously. I declared that, since the Baron had gone and
complained of me to the General, as though I were a mere servant of the
General's, he had, in the first place, lost me my post, and, in the
second place, treated me like a person to whom, as to one not qualified
to answer for himself, it was not even worth while to speak. Naturally,
I said, I felt insulted at this. Yet, comprehending as I did,
differences of years, of social status, and so forth (here I could
scarcely help smiling), I was not anxious to bring about further scenes
by going personally to demand or to request satisfaction of the Baron.
All that I felt was that I had a right to go in person and beg the
Baron's and the Baroness's pardon--the more so since, of late, I had
been feeling unwell and unstrung, and had been in a fanciful condition.
And so forth, and so forth. Yet (I continued) the Baron's offensive
behaviour to me of yesterday (that is to say, the fact of his referring
the matter to the General) as well as his insistence that the General
should deprive me of my post, had placed me in such a position that I
could not well express my regret to him (the Baron) and to his good
lady, for the reason that in all probability both he and the Baroness,
with the world at large, would imagine that I was doing so merely
because I hoped, by my action, to recover my post. Hence, I found
myself forced to request the Baron to express to me HIS OWN regrets, as
well as to express them in the most unqualified manner--to say, in
fact, that he had never had any wish to insult me. After the Baron had
done THAT, I should, for my part, at once feel free to express to him,
whole-heartedly and without reserve, my own regrets. "In short," I
declared in conclusion, "my one desire is that the Baron may make it
possible for me to adopt the latter course."

"Oh fie! What refinements and subtleties!" exclaimed De Griers.
"Besides, what have you to express regret for? Confess, Monsieur,
Monsieur--pardon me, but I have forgotten your name--confess, I say,
that all this is merely a plan to annoy the General? Or perhaps, you
have some other and special end in view? Eh?"

"In return you must pardon ME, mon cher Marquis, and tell me what you
have to do with it."

"The General--"

"But what of the General? Last night he said that, for some reason or
another, it behoved him to 'move with especial care at present;'
wherefore, he was feeling nervous. But I did not understand the
reference."

"Yes, there DO exist special reasons for his doing so," assented De
Griers in a conciliatory tone, yet with rising anger. "You are
acquainted with Mlle. de Cominges, are you not?"

"Mlle. Blanche, you mean?"

"Yes, Mlle. Blanche de Cominges. Doubtless you know also that the
General is in love with this young lady, and may even be about to marry
her before he leaves here? Imagine, therefore, what any scene or
scandal would entail upon him!"

"I cannot see that the marriage scheme need, be affected by scenes or
scandals."

"Mais le Baron est si irascible--un caractere prussien, vous savez!
Enfin il fera une querelle d'Allemand."

"I do not care," I replied, "seeing that I no longer belong to his
household" (of set purpose I was trying to talk as senselessly as
possible). "But is it quite settled that Mlle. is to marry the General?
What are they waiting for? Why should they conceal such a matter--at
all events from ourselves, the General's own party?"

"I cannot tell you. The marriage is not yet a settled affair, for they
are awaiting news from Russia. The General has business transactions to
arrange."

"Ah! Connected, doubtless, with madame his mother?"

De Griers shot at me a glance of hatred.

"To cut things short," he interrupted, "I have complete confidence in
your native politeness, as well as in your tact and good sense. I feel
sure that you will do what I suggest, even if it is only for the sake
of this family which has received you as a kinsman into its bosom and
has always loved and respected you."

"Be so good as to observe," I remarked, "that the same family has just
EXPELLED me from its bosom. All that you are saying you are saying but
for show; but, when people have just said to you, 'Of course we do not
wish to turn you out, yet, for the sake of appearance's, you must
PERMIT yourself to be turned out,' nothing can matter very much."

"Very well, then," he said, in a sterner and more arrogant tone.
"Seeing that my solicitations have had no effect upon you, it is my
duty to mention that other measures will be taken. There exist here
police, you must remember, and this very day they shall send you
packing. Que diable! To think of a blanc bec like yourself challenging
a person like the Baron to a duel! Do you suppose that you will be
ALLOWED to do such things? Just try doing them, and see if any one will
be afraid of you! The reason why I have asked you to desist is that I
can see that your conduct is causing the General annoyance. Do you
believe that the Baron could not tell his lacquey simply to put you out
of doors?"

"Nevertheless I should not GO out of doors," I retorted with absolute
calm. "You are labouring under a delusion, Monsieur de Griers. The
thing will be done in far better trim than you imagine. I was just
about to start for Mr. Astley's, to ask him to be my intermediary--in
other words, my second. He has a strong liking for me, and I do not
think that he will refuse. He will go and see the Baron on MY behalf,
and the Baron will certainly not decline to receive him. Although I am
only a tutor--a kind of subaltern, Mr. Astley is known to all men as
the nephew of a real English lord, the Lord Piebroch, as well as a lord
in his own right. Yes, you may be pretty sure that the Baron will be
civil to Mr. Astley, and listen to him. Or, should he decline to do so,
Mr. Astley will take the refusal as a personal affront to himself (for
you know how persistent the English are?) and thereupon introduce to
the Baron a friend of his own (and he has many friends in a good
position). That being so, picture to yourself the issue of the
affair--an affair which will not quite end as you think it will."

This caused the Frenchman to bethink him of playing the coward. "Really
things may be as this fellow says," he evidently thought. "Really he
MIGHT be able to engineer another scene."

"Once more I beg of you to let the matter drop," he continued in a tone
that was now entirely conciliatory. "One would think that it actually
PLEASED you to have scenes! Indeed, it is a brawl rather than genuine
satisfaction that you are seeking. I have said that the affair may
prove to be diverting, and even clever, and that possibly you may
attain something by it; yet none the less I tell you" (he said this
only because he saw me rise and reach for my hat) "that I have come
hither also to hand you these few words from a certain person. Read
them, please, for I must take her back an answer."

So saying, he took from his pocket a small, compact, wafer-sealed note,
and handed it to me. In Polina's handwriting I read:

"I hear that you are thinking of going on with this affair. You have
lost your temper now, and are beginning to play the fool! Certain
circumstances, however, I may explain to you later. Pray cease from
your folly, and put a check upon yourself. For folly it all is. I have
need of you, and, moreover, you have promised to obey me. Remember the
Shlangenberg.  I ask you to be obedient. If necessary, I shall even BID
you be obedient.--Your own----POLINA.

"P.S.--If so be that you still bear a grudge against me for what
happened last night, pray forgive me."


Everything, to my eyes, seemed to change as I read these words. My lips
grew pale, and I began to tremble. Meanwhile, the cursed Frenchman was
eyeing me discreetly and askance, as though he wished to avoid
witnessing my confusion. It would have been better if he had laughed
outright.

"Very well," I said, "you can tell Mlle. not to disturb herself. But,"
I added sharply, "I would also ask you why you have been so long in
handing me this note? Instead of chattering about trifles, you ought to
have delivered me the missive at once--if you have really come
commissioned as you say."

"Well, pardon some natural haste on my part, for the situation is so
strange. I wished first to gain some personal knowledge of your
intentions; and, moreover, I did not know the contents of the note, and
thought that it could be given you at any time."

"I understand," I replied. "So you were ordered to hand me the note
only in the last resort, and if you could not otherwise appease me? Is
it not so? Speak out, Monsieur de Griers."

"Perhaps," said he, assuming a look of great forbearance, but gazing at
me in a meaning way.

I reached for my hat; whereupon he nodded, and went out. Yet on his
lips I fancied that I could see a mocking smile. How could it have been
otherwise?

"You and I are to have a reckoning later, Master Frenchman," I muttered
as I descended the stairs. "Yes, we will measure our strength
together." Yet my thoughts were all in confusion, for again something
seemed to have struck me dizzy. Presently the air revived me a little,
and, a couple of minutes later, my brain had sufficiently cleared to
enable two ideas in particular to stand out in it. Firstly, I asked
myself, which of the absurd, boyish, and extravagant threats which I
had uttered at random last night had made everybody so alarmed?
Secondly, what was the influence which this Frenchman appeared to
exercise over Polina? He had but to give the word, and at once she did
as he desired--at once she wrote me a note to beg of me to forbear! Of
course, the relations between the pair had, from the first, been a
riddle to me--they had been so ever since I had first made their
acquaintance.  But of late I had remarked in her a strong aversion for,
even a contempt for--him, while, for his part, he had scarcely even
looked at her, but had behaved towards her always in the most churlish
fashion. Yes, I had noted that. Also, Polina herself had mentioned to
me her dislike for him, and delivered herself of some remarkable
confessions on the subject. Hence, he must have got her into his power
somehow--somehow he must be holding her as in a vice.



VIII

All at once, on the Promenade, as it was called--that is to say, in the
Chestnut Avenue--I came face to face with my Englishman.

"I was just coming to see you," he said; "and you appear to be out on a
similar errand. So you have parted with your employers?"

"How do you know that?" I asked in astonishment. "Is EVERY ONE aware of
the fact?"

"By no means. Not every one would consider such a fact to be of moment.
Indeed, I have never heard any one speak of it."

"Then how come you to know it?"

"Because I have had occasion to do so. Whither are you bound? I like
you, and was therefore coming to pay you a visit."

"What a splendid fellow you are, Mr. Astley!" I cried, though still
wondering how he had come by his knowledge. "And since I have not yet
had my coffee, and you have, in all probability, scarcely tasted yours,
let us adjourn to the Casino Cafe, where we can sit and smoke and have
a talk."

The cafe in question was only a hundred paces away; so, when coffee had
been brought, we seated ourselves, and I lit a cigarette. Astley was no
smoker, but, taking a seat by my side, he prepared himself to listen.

"I do not intend to go away," was my first remark. "I intend, on the
contrary, to remain here."

"That I never doubted," he answered good-humouredly.

It is a curious fact that, on my way to see him, I had never even
thought of telling him of my love for Polina. In fact, I had purposely
meant to avoid any mention of the subject. Nor, during our stay in the
place, had I ever made aught but the scantiest reference to it. You
see, not only was Astley a man of great reserve, but also from the
first I had perceived that Polina had made a great impression upon him,
although he never spoke of her. But now, strangely enough, he had no
sooner seated himself and bent his steely gaze upon me, than, for some
reason or another, I felt moved to tell him everything--to speak to him
of my love in all its phases. For an hour and a half did I discourse on
the subject, and found it a pleasure to do so, even though this was the
first occasion on which I had referred to the matter. Indeed, when, at
certain moments, I perceived that my more ardent passages confused him,
I purposely increased my ardour of narration. Yet one thing I regret:
and that is that I made references to the Frenchman which were a little
over-personal.

Mr. Astley sat without moving as he listened to me. Not a word nor a
sound of any kind did he utter as he stared into my eyes. Suddenly,
however, on my mentioning the Frenchman, he interrupted me, and
inquired sternly whether I did right to speak of an extraneous matter
(he had always been a strange man in his mode of propounding questions).

"No, I fear not," I replied.

"And concerning this Marquis and Mlle. Polina you know nothing beyond
surmise?"

Again I was surprised that such a categorical question should come from
such a reserved individual.

"No, I know nothing FOR CERTAIN about them" was my reply. "No--nothing."

"Then you have done very wrong to speak of them to me, or even to
imagine things about them."

"Quite so, quite so," I interrupted in some astonishment. "I admit
that. Yet that is not the question." Whereupon I related to him in
detail the incident of two days ago. I spoke of Polina's outburst, of
my encounter with the Baron, of my dismissal, of the General's
extraordinary pusillanimity, and of the call which De Griers had that
morning paid me. In conclusion, I showed Astley the note which I had
lately received.

"What do you make of it?" I asked. "When I met you I was just coming to
ask you your opinion. For myself, I could have killed this Frenchman,
and am not sure that I shall not do so even yet."

"I feel the same about it," said Mr. Astley. "As for Mlle.
Polina--well, you yourself know that, if necessity drives, one enters
into relation with people whom one simply detests. Even between this
couple there may be something which, though unknown to you, depends
upon extraneous circumstances. For, my own part, I think that you may
reassure yourself--or at all events partially. And as for Mlle.
Polina's proceedings of two days ago, they were, of course, strange;
not because she can have meant to get rid of you, or to earn for you a
thrashing from the Baron's cudgel (which for some curious reason, he
did not use, although he had it ready in his hands), but because such
proceedings on the part of such--well, of such a refined lady as Mlle.
Polina are, to say the least of it, unbecoming. But she cannot have
guessed that you would carry out her absurd wish to the letter?"

"Do you know what?" suddenly I cried as I fixed Mr. Astley with my
gaze. "I believe that you have already heard the story from some
one--very possibly from Mlle. Polina herself?"

In return he gave me an astonished stare.

"Your eyes look very fiery," he said with a return of his former calm,
"and in them I can read suspicion. Now, you have no right whatever to
be suspicious. It is not a right which I can for a moment recognise,
and I absolutely refuse to answer your questions."

"Enough! You need say no more," I cried with a strange emotion at my
heart, yet not altogether understanding what had aroused that emotion
in my breast. Indeed, when, where, and how could Polina have chosen
Astley to be one of her confidants? Of late I had come rather to
overlook him in this connection, even though Polina had always been a
riddle to me--so much so that now, when I had just permitted myself to
tell my friend of my infatuation in all its aspects, I had found myself
struck, during the very telling, with the fact that in my relations
with her I could specify nothing that was explicit, nothing that was
positive. On the contrary, my relations had been purely fantastic,
strange, and unreal; they had been unlike anything else that I could
think of.

"Very well, very well," I replied with a warmth equal to Astley's own.
"Then I stand confounded, and have no further opinions to offer. But
you are a good fellow, and I am glad to know what you think about it
all, even though I do not need your advice."

Then, after a pause, I resumed:

"For instance, what reason should you assign for the General taking
fright in this way? Why should my stupid clowning have led the world to
elevate it into a serious incident? Even De Griers has found it
necessary to put in his oar (and he only interferes on the most
important occasions), and to visit me, and to address to me the most
earnest supplications. Yes, HE, De Griers, has actually been playing
the suppliant to ME! And, mark you, although he came to me as early as
nine o'clock, he had ready-prepared in his hand Mlle. Polina's note.
When, I would ask, was that note written? Mlle. Polina must have been
aroused from sleep for the express purpose of writing it. At all events
the circumstance shows that she is an absolute slave to the Frenchman,
since she actually begs my pardon in the note--actually begs my pardon!
Yet what is her personal concern in the matter? Why is she interested
in it at all? Why, too, is the whole party so afraid of this precious
Baron? And what sort of a business do you call it for the General to be
going to marry Mlle. Blanche de Cominges? He told me last night that,
because of the circumstance, he must 'move with especial care at
present.' What is your opinion of it all? Your look convinces me that
you know more about it than I do."

Mr. Astley smiled and nodded.

"Yes, I think I DO know more about it than you do," he assented. "The
affair centres around this Mlle. Blanche. Of that I feel certain."

"And what of Mlle. Blanche?" I cried impatiently (for in me there had
dawned a sudden hope that this would enable me to discover something
about Polina).

"Well, my belief is that at the present moment Mlle. Blanche has, in
very truth, a special reason for wishing to avoid any trouble with the
Baron and the Baroness.  It might lead not only to some unpleasantness,
but even to a scandal."

"Oh, oh!"

"Also I may tell you that Mlle. Blanche has been in Roulettenberg
before, for she was staying here three seasons ago. I myself was in the
place at the time, and in those days Mlle. Blanche was not known as
Mlle. de Cominges, nor was her mother, the Widow de Cominges, even in
existence. In any case no one ever mentioned the latter. De Griers,
too, had not materialised, and I am convinced that not only do the
parties stand in no relation to one another, but also they have not
long enjoyed one another's acquaintance. Likewise, the Marquisate de
Griers is of recent creation. Of that I have reason to be sure, owing
to a certain circumstance. Even the name De Griers itself may be taken
to be a new invention, seeing that I have a friend who once met the
said 'Marquis' under a different name altogether."

"Yet he possesses a good circle of friends?"

"Possibly. Mlle. Blanche also may possess that. Yet it is not three
years since she received from the local police, at the instance of the
Baroness, an invitation to leave the town. And she left it."

"But why?"

"Well, I must tell you that she first appeared here in company with an
Italian--a prince of some sort, a man who bore an historic name
