literary work. In that case I've a lot of work for him. I want some one
to help me and the sooner the better. Would he take the work or not?
He's been recommended to me...."

"Oh, most certainly he will. _Et vous ferez un bienfait_...."

"I'm not doing it as a _bienfait_. I need some one to help me."

"I know Shatov pretty well," I said, "and if you will trust me with a
message to him I'll go to him this minute."

"Tell him to come to me at twelve o'clock to-morrow morning. Capital!
Thank you. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, are you ready?"

They went away. I ran at once, of course, to Shatov.

_"Mon ami!"_ said Stepan Trofimovitch, overtaking me on the steps. "Be
sure to be at my lodging at ten or eleven o'clock when I come back. Oh,
I've acted very wrongly in my conduct to you and to every one."


VIII

I did not find Shatov at home. I ran round again, two hours later. He
was still out. At last, at eight o'clock I went to him again, meaning
to leave a note if I did not find him; again I failed to find him. His
lodging was shut up, and he lived alone without a servant of any sort.
I did think of knocking at Captain Lebyadkin's down below to ask about
Shatov; but it was all shut up below, too, and there was no sound or
light as though the place were empty. I passed by Lebyadkin's door with
curiosity, remembering the stories I had heard that day. Finally, I made
up my mind to come very early next morning. To tell the truth I did not
put much confidence in the effect of a note. Shatov might take no notice
of it; he was so obstinate and shy. Cursing my want of success, I was
going out of the gate when all at once I stumbled on Mr. Kirillov.
He was going into the house and he recognised me first. As he began
questioning me of himself, I told him how things were, and that I had a
note.

"Let us go in," said he, "I will do everything."

I remembered that Liputin had told us he had taken the wooden lodge in
the yard that morning. In the lodge, which was too large for him, a deaf
old woman who waited upon him was living too. The owner of the house had
moved into a new house in another street, where he kept a restaurant,
and this old woman, a relation of his, I believe, was left behind to
look after everything in the old house. The rooms in the lodge were
fairly clean, though the wall-papers were dirty. In the one we went into
the furniture was of different sorts, picked up here and there, and all
utterly worthless. There were two card-tables, a chest of drawers made
of elder, a big deal table that must have come from some peasant hut
or kitchen, chairs and a sofa with trellis-work back and hard leather
cushions. In one corner there was an old-fashioned ikon, in front of
which the old woman had lighted a lamp before we came in, and on the
walls hung two dingy oil-paintings, one, a portrait of the Tsar Nikolas
I, painted apparently between 1820 and 1830; the other the portrait of
some bishop. Mr. Kirillov lighted a candle and took out of his trunk,
which stood not yet unpacked in a corner, an envelope, sealing-wax, and
a glass seal.

"Seal your note and address the envelope."

I would have objected that this was unnecessary, but he insisted. When I
had addressed the envelope I took my cap.

"I was thinking you'd have tea," he said. "I have bought tea. Will you?"

I could not refuse. The old woman soon brought in the tea, that is, a
very large tea-pot of boiling water, a little tea-pot full of strong
tea, two large earthenware cups, coarsely decorated, a fancy loaf, and a
whole deep saucer of lump sugar.

"I love tea at night," said he. "I walk much and drink it till daybreak.
Abroad tea at night is inconvenient."

"You go to bed at daybreak?"

"Always; for a long while. I eat little; always tea. Liputin's sly, but
impatient."

I was surprised at his wanting to talk; I made up my mind to take
advantage of the opportunity. "There were unpleasant misunderstandings
this morning," I observed.

He scowled.

"That's foolishness; that's great nonsense. All this is nonsense because
Lebyadkin is drunk. I did not tell Liputin, but only explained the
nonsense, because he got it all wrong. Liputin has a great deal of
fantasy, he built up a mountain out of nonsense. I trusted Liputin
yesterday."

"And me to-day?" I said, laughing.

"But you see, you knew all about it already this morning; Liputin is
weak or impatient, or malicious or... he's envious."

The last word struck me.

"You've mentioned so many adjectives, however, that it would be strange
if one didn't describe him."

"Or all at once."

"Yes, and that's what Liputin really is--he's a chaos. He was lying this
morning when he said you were writing something, wasn't he?

"Why should he?" he said, scowling again and staring at the floor.

I apologised, and began assuring him that I was not inquisitive. He
flushed.

"He told the truth; I am writing. Only that's no matter."

We were silent for a minute. He suddenly smiled with the childlike smile
I had noticed that morning.

"He invented that about heads himself out of a book, and told me first
himself, and understands badly. But I only seek the causes why men dare
not kill themselves; that's all. And it's all no matter."

"How do you mean they don't dare? Are there so few suicides?"

"Very few."

"Do you really think so?"

He made no answer, got up, and began walking to and fro lost in thought.

"What is it restrains people from suicide, do you think?" I asked.

He looked at me absent-mindedly, as though trying to remember what we
were talking about.

"I... I don't know much yet.... Two prejudices restrain them, two
things; only two, one very little, the other very big."

"What is the little thing?"

"Pain."

"Pain? Can that be of importance at such a moment?"

"Of the greatest. There are two sorts: those who kill themselves either
from great sorrow or from spite, or being mad, or no matter what...
they do it suddenly. They think little about the pain, but kill
themselves suddenly. But some do it from reason--they think a great
deal."

"Why, are there people who do it from reason?"

"Very many. If it were not for superstition there would be more, very
many, all."

"What, all?"

He did not answer.

"But aren't there means of dying without pain?"

"Imagine"--he stopped before me--"imagine a stone as big as a great
house; it hangs and you are under it; if it falls on you, on your head,
will it hurt you?"

"A stone as big as a house? Of course it would be fearful."

"I speak not of the fear. Will it hurt?"

"A stone as big as a mountain, weighing millions of tons? Of course it
wouldn't hurt."

"But really stand there and while it hangs you will fear very much that
it will hurt. The most learned man, the greatest doctor, all, all will
be very much frightened. Every one will know that it won't hurt, and
every one will be afraid that it will hurt."

"Well, and the second cause, the big one?"

"The other world!"

"You mean punishment?"

"That's no matter. The other world; only the other world."

"Are there no atheists, such as don't believe in the other world at
all?"

Again he did not answer.

"You judge from yourself, perhaps."

"Every one cannot judge except from himself," he said, reddening. "There
will be full freedom when it will be just the same to live or not to
live. That's the goal for all."

"The goal? But perhaps no one will care to live then?"

"No one," he pronounced with decision.

"Man fears death because he loves life. That's how I understand it," I
observed, "and that's determined by nature."

"That's abject; and that's where the deception comes in." His eyes
flashed. "Life is pain, life is terror, and man is unhappy. Now all is
pain and terror. Now man loves life, because he loves pain and terror,
and so they have done according. Life is given now for pain and terror,
and that's the deception. Now man is not yet what he will be. There will
be a new man, happy and proud. For whom it will be the same to live or
not to live, he will be the new man. He who will conquer pain and terror
will himself be a god. And this God will not be."

"Then this God does exist according to you?"

"He does not exist, but He is. In the stone there is no pain, but in the
fear of the stone is the pain. God is the pain of the fear of death. He
who will conquer pain and terror will become himself a god. Then there
will be a new life, a new man; everything will be new... then they will
divide history into two parts: from the gorilla to the annihilation of
God, and from the annihilation of God to..."

"To the gorilla?"

"... To the transformation of the earth, and of man physically. Man
will be God, and will be transformed physically, and the world will
be transformed and things will be transformed and thoughts and all
feelings. What do you think: will man be changed physically then?"

"If it will be just the same living or not living, all will kill
themselves, and perhaps that's what the change will be?"

"That's no matter. They will kill deception. Every one who wants the
supreme freedom must dare to kill himself. He who dares to kill himself
has found out the secret of the deception. There is no freedom beyond;
that is all, and there is nothing beyond. He who dares kill himself is
God. Now every one can do so that there shall be no God and shall be
nothing. But no one has once done it yet."

"There have been millions of suicides."

"But always not for that; always with terror and not for that object.
Not to kill fear. He who kills himself only to kill fear will become a
god at once."

"He won't have time, perhaps," I observed.

"That's no matter," he answered softly, with calm pride, almost disdain.
"I'm sorry that you seem to be laughing," he added half a minute later.

"It seems strange to me that you were so irritable this morning and are
now so calm, though you speak with warmth."

"This morning? It was funny this morning," he answered with a smile. "I
don't like scolding, and I never laugh," he added mournfully.

"Yes, you don't spend your nights very cheerfully over your tea."

I got up and took my cap.

"You think not?" he smiled with some surprise. "Why? No, I... I don't
know." He was suddenly confused. "I know not how it is with the others,
and I feel that I cannot do as others. Everybody thinks and then at once
thinks of something else. I can't think of something else. I think all
my life of one thing. God has tormented me all my life," he ended up
suddenly with astonishing expansiveness.

"And tell me, if I may ask, why is it you speak Russian not quite
correctly? Surely you haven't forgotten it after five years abroad?"

"Don't I speak correctly? I don't know. No, it's not because of abroad.
I have talked like that all my life... it's no matter to me."

"Another question, a more delicate one. I quite believe you that you're
disinclined to meet people and talk very little. Why have you talked to
me now?"

"To you? This morning you sat so nicely and you... but it's all no
matter... you are like my brother, very much, extremely," he added,
flushing. "He has been dead seven years. He was older, very, very much."

"I suppose he had a great influence on your way of thinking?"

"N-no. He said little; he said nothing. I'll give your note."

He saw me to the gate with a lantern, to lock it after me. "Of course
he's mad," I decided. In the gateway I met with another encounter.


IX

I had only just lifted my leg over the high barrier across the bottom of
the gateway, when suddenly a strong hand clutched at my chest.

"Who's this?" roared a voice, "a friend or an enemy? Own up!"

"He's one of us; one of us!" Liputin's voice squealed near by. "It's Mr.
G----v, a young man of classical education, in touch with the highest
society."

"I love him if he's in society, clas-si... that means he's high-ly
ed-u-cated. The retired Captain Ignat Lebyadkin, at the service of the
world and his friends... if they're true ones, if they're true ones, the
scoundrels."

Captain Lebyadkin, a stout, fleshy man over six feet in height, with
curly hair and a red face, was so extremely drunk that he could scarcely
stand up before me, and articulated with difficulty. I had seen him
before, however, in the distance.

"And this one!" he roared again, noticing Kirillov, who was still
standing with the lantern; he raised his fist, but let it fall again at
once.

"I forgive you for your learning! Ignat Lebyadkin--high-ly
ed-u-cated....

     'A bomb of love with stinging smart
     Exploded in Ignaty's heart.
     In anguish dire I weep again
     The arm that at Sevastopol
     I lost in bitter pain!'

Not that I ever was at Sevastopol, or ever lost my arm, but you know
what rhyme is." He pushed up to me with his ugly, tipsy face.

"He is in a hurry, he is going home!" Liputin tried to persuade him.
"He'll tell Lizaveta Nikolaevna to-morrow."

"Lizaveta!" he yelled again. "Stay, don't go!

     A variation:
     'Among the Amazons a star,
     Upon her steed she flashes by,
     And smiles upon me from afar,
     The child of aris-to-cra-cy!
     To a Starry Amazon.'

You know that's a hymn. It's a hymn, if you're not an ass! The duffers,
they don't understand! Stay!"

He caught hold of my coat, though I pulled myself away with all my
might.

"Tell her I'm a knight and the soul of honour, and as for that Dasha...
I'd pick her up and chuck her out.... She's only a serf, she daren't..."

At this point he fell down, for I pulled myself violently out of his
hands and ran into the street. Liputin clung on to me.

"Alexey Nilitch will pick him up. Do you know what I've just found out
from him?" he babbled in desperate haste. "Did you hear his verses? He's
sealed those verses to the 'Starry Amazon' in an envelope and is going
to send them to-morrow to Lizaveta Nikolaevna, signed with his name in
full. What a fellow!"

"I bet you suggested it to him yourself."

"You'll lose your bet," laughed Liputin. "He's in love, in love like a
cat, and do you know it began with hatred. He hated Lizaveta Nikolaevna
at first so much, for riding on horseback that he almost swore aloud at
her in the street. Yes, he did abuse her! Only the day before yesterday
he swore at her when she rode by--luckily she didn't hear. And,
suddenly, to-day--poetry! Do you know he means to risk a proposal?
Seriously! Seriously!"

"I wonder at you, Liputin; whenever there's anything nasty going on
you're always on the spot taking a leading part in it," I said angrily.

"You're going rather far, Mr. G----v. Isn't your poor little
heart quaking, perhaps, in terror of a rival?"

"Wha-at!" I cried, standing still.

"Well, now to punish you I won't say anything more, and wouldn't you
like to know though? Take this alone, that that lout is not a simple
captain now but a landowner of our province, and rather an important
one, too, for Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sold him all his estate the other
day, formerly of two hundred serfs; and as God's above, I'm not lying.
I've only just heard it, but it was from a most reliable source. And now
you can ferret it out for yourself; I'll say nothing more; good-bye."



X


Stepan Trofimovitch was awaiting me with hysterical impatience. It
was an hour since he had returned. I found him in a state resembling
intoxication; for the first five minutes at least I thought he was
drunk. Alas, the visit to the Drozdovs had been the finishing-stroke.

"_Mon ami!_ I have completely lost the thread... Lise... I love and
respect that angel as before; just as before; but it seems to me they
both asked me simply to find out something from me, that is more simply
to get something out of me, and then to get rid of me.... That's how it
is."

"You ought to be ashamed!" I couldn't help exclaiming. "My friend, now I
am utterly alone. _Enfin, c'est ridicule._ Would you believe it, the place
is positively packed with mysteries there too. They simply flew at me
about those ears and noses, and some mysteries in Petersburg too. You
know they hadn't heard till they came about the tricks Nicolas played
here four years ago. 'You were here, you saw it, is it true that he is
mad?' Where they got the idea I can't make out. Why is it that Praskovya
is so anxious Nicolas should be mad? The woman will have it so, she
will. _Ce Maurice,_ or what's his name, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, _brave homme
tout de même..._ but can it be for his sake, and after she wrote herself
from Paris to _cette pauvre amie?... Enfin,_ this Praskovya, as _cette
chère amie_ calls her, is a type. She's Gogol's Madame Box, of immortal
memory, only she's a spiteful Madame Box, a malignant Box, and in an
immensely exaggerated form."

"That's making her out a regular packing-case if it's an exaggerated
form."

"Well, perhaps it's the opposite; it's all the same, only don't
interrupt me, for I'm all in a whirl. They are all at loggerheads,
except Lise, she keeps on with her 'Auntie, auntie!' but Lise's sly, and
there's something behind it too. Secrets. She has quarrelled with the
old lady. _Cette pauvre_ auntie tyrannises over every one it's true, and
then there's the governor's wife, and the rudeness of local society, and
Karmazinov's 'rudeness'; and then this idea of madness, _ce Lipoutine,
ce que je ne comprends pas..._ and... and they say she's been putting
vinegar on her head, and here are we with our complaints and
letters.... Oh, how I have tormented her and at such a time! _Je suis un
ingrat!_ Only imagine, I come back and find a letter from her; read it,
read it! Oh, how ungrateful it was of me!"

He gave me a letter he had just received from Varvara Petrovna. She
seemed to have repented of her "stay at home." The letter was amiable
but decided in tone, and brief. She invited Stepan Trofimovitch to come
to her the day after to-morrow, which was Sunday, at twelve o'clock, and
advised him to bring one of his friends with him. (My name was mentioned
in parenthesis). She promised on her side to invite Shatov, as the
brother of Darya Pavlovna. "You can obtain a final answer from her: will
that be enough for you? Is this the formality you were so anxious for?"

"Observe that irritable phrase about formality. Poor thing, poor thing,
the friend of my whole life! I confess the sudden determination of my
whole future almost crushed me.... I confess I still had hopes, but now
_tout est dit._ I know now that all is over. _C'est terrible!_ Oh, that
that Sunday would never come and everything would go on in the old way.
You would have gone on coming and I'd have gone on here...."

"You've been upset by all those nasty things Liputin said, those
slanders."

"My dear, you have touched on another sore spot with your friendly
finger. Such friendly fingers are generally merciless and sometimes
unreasonable; _pardon,_ you may not believe it, but I'd almost forgotten
all that, all that nastiness, not that I forgot it, indeed, but in
my foolishness I tried all the while I was with Lise to be happy and
persuaded myself I was happy. But now... Oh, now I'm thinking of
that generous, humane woman, so long-suffering with my contemptible
failings--not that she's been altogether long-suffering, but what have
I been with my horrid, worthless character! I'm a capricious child, with
all the egoism of a child and none of the innocence. For the last twenty
years she's been looking after me like a nurse, _cette pauvre_ auntie, as
Lise so charmingly calls her.... And now, after twenty years, the child
clamours to be married, sending letter after letter, while her head's
in a vinegar-compress and... now he's got it--on Sunday I shall be a
married man, that's no joke.... And why did I keep insisting myself,
what did I write those letters for? Oh, I forgot. Lise idolizes Darya
Pavlovna, she says so anyway; she says of her '_c'est un ange,_ only
rather a reserved one.' They both advised me, even Praskovya. ...
Praskovya didn't advise me though. Oh, what venom lies concealed in
that 'Box'! And Lise didn't exactly advise me: 'What do you want to get
married for,' she said, 'your intellectual pleasures ought to be enough
for you.' She laughed. I forgive her for laughing, for there's an ache
in her own heart. You can't get on without a woman though, they said to
me. The infirmities of age are coming upon you, and she will tuck you
up, or whatever it is.... _Ma foi,_ I've been thinking myself all this
time I've been sitting with you that Providence was sending her to me
in the decline of my stormy years and that she would tuck me up, or
whatever they call it... _enfin,_ she'll be handy for the housekeeping.
See what a litter there is, look how everything's lying about. I said it
must be cleared up this morning, and look at the book on the floor! _La
pauvre amie_ was always angry at the untidiness here. ... Ah, now I shall
no longer hear her voice! _Vingt ans!_ And it seems they've had anonymous
letters. Only fancy, it's said that Nicolas has sold Lebyadkin his
property. _C'est un monstre; et enfin_ what is Lebyadkin? Lise listens,
and listens, ooh, how she listens! I forgave her laughing. I saw her
face as she listened, and _ce Maurice..._I shouldn't care to be in his
shoes now, _brave homme tout de même,_ but rather shy; but never mind
him...."

He paused. He was tired and upset, and sat with drooping head, staring
at the floor with his tired eyes. I took advantage of the interval to
tell him of my visit to Filipov's house, and curtly and dryly expressed
my opinion that Lebyadkin's sister (whom I had never seen) really
might have been somehow victimised by Nicolas at some time during that
mysterious period of his life, as Liputin had called it, and that it
was very possible that Lebyadkin received sums of money from Nicolas for
some reason, but that was all. As for the scandal about Darya Pavlovna,
that was all nonsense, all that brute Liputin's misrepresentations, that
this was anyway what Alexey Nilitch warmly maintained, and we had
no grounds for disbelieving him. Stepan Trofimovitch listened to my
assurances with an absent air, as though they did not concern him. I
mentioned by the way my conversation with Kirillov, and added that he
might be mad.

"He's not mad, but one of those shallow-minded people," he mumbled
listlessly. "_Ces gens-là supposent la nature et la societé humaine
autres que Dieu ne les a faites et qu'elles ne sont réellement._ People
try to make up to them, but Stepan Verhovensky does not, anyway. I saw
them that time in Petersburg _avec cette chère amie_ (oh, how I used to
wound her then), and I wasn't afraid of their abuse or even of their
praise. I'm not afraid now either. _Mais parlons d'autre chose...._
I believe I have done dreadful things. Only fancy, I sent a letter
yesterday to Darya Pavlovna and... how I curse myself for it!"

"What did you write about?"

"Oh, my friend, believe me, it was all done in a noble spirit. I let
her know that I had written to Nicolas five days before, also in a noble
spirit."

"I understand now!" I cried with heat. "And what right had you to couple
their names like that?"

"But, _mon cher,_ don't crush me completely, don't shout at me; as it is
I'm utterly squashed like... a black-beetle. And, after all, I thought
it was all so honourable. Suppose that something really happened...
_en Suisse_...or was beginning. I was bound to question their hearts
beforehand that I..._enfin,_ that I might not constrain their hearts,
and be a stumbling-block in their paths. I acted simply from honourable
feeling."

"Oh, heavens! What a stupid thing you've done!" I cried involuntarily.

"Yes, yes," he assented with positive eagerness. "You have never said
anything more just, _c'était bête, mais que faire? Tout est dit._ I shall
marry her just the same even if it be to cover 'another's sins.' So
there was no object in writing, was there?"

"You're at that idea again!"

"Oh, you won't frighten me with your shouts now. You see a different
Stepan Verhovensky before you now. The man I was is buried. _Enfin,
tout est dit._ And why do you cry out? Simply because you're not getting
married, and you won't have to wear a certain decoration on your head.
Does that shock you again? My poor friend, you don't know woman, while
I have done nothing but study her. 'If you want to conquer the world,
conquer yourself'--the one good thing that another romantic like you, my
bride's brother, Shatov, has succeeded in saying. I would gladly borrow
from him his phrase. Well, here I am ready to conquer myself, and I'm
getting married. And what am I conquering by way of the whole world?
Oh, my friend, marriage is the moral death of every proud soul, of all
independence. Married life will corrupt me, it will sap my energy, my
courage in the service of the cause. Children will come, probably not my
own either--certainly not my own: a wise man is not afraid to face the
truth. Liputin proposed this morning putting up barricades to keep out
Nicolas; Liputin's a fool. A woman would deceive the all-seeing eye
itself. _Le bon Dieu_ knew what He was in for when He was creating woman,
but I'm sure that she meddled in it herself and forced Him to create her
such as she is... and with such attributes: for who would have incurred
so much trouble for nothing? I know Nastasya may be angry with me for
free-thinking, but..._enfin, tout est dit._"

He wouldn't have been himself if he could have dispensed with the cheap
gibing free-thought which was in vogue in his day. Now, at any rate, he
comforted himself with a gibe, but not for long.

"Oh, if that day after to-morrow, that Sunday, might never come!" he
exclaimed suddenly, this time in utter despair. "Why could not this
one week be without a Sunday--_si le miracle existe_? What would it be to
Providence to blot out one Sunday from the calendar? If only to prove
His power to the atheists _et que tout soit dit!_ Oh, how I loved her!
Twenty years, these twenty years, and she has never understood me!"

"But of whom are you talking? Even I don't understand you!" I asked,
wondering.

"_Vingt ans!_ And she has not once understood me; oh, it's cruel! And can
she really believe that I am marrying from fear, from poverty? Oh, the
shame of it! Oh, Auntie, Auntie, I do it for you!... Oh, let her know,
that Auntie, that she is the one woman I have adored for twenty years!
She must learn this, it must be so, if not they will need force to drag
me under _ce qu'on appelle le_ wedding-crown."

It was the first time I had heard this confession, and so vigorously
uttered. I won't conceal the fact that I was terribly tempted to laugh.
I was wrong.

"He is the only one left me now, the only one, my one hope!" he cried
suddenly, clasping his hands as though struck by a new idea. "Only he,
my poor boy, can save me now, and, oh, why doesn't he come! Oh, my son,
oh, my Petrusha.... And though I do not deserve the name of father,
but rather that of tiger, yet..._Laissez-moi, mon ami,_ I'll lie down a
little, to collect my ideas. I am so tired, so tired. And I think it's
time you were in bed. _Voyez vous,_ it's twelve o'clock...."




CHAPTER IV. THE CRIPPLE


SHATOV WAS NOT PERVERSE but acted on my note, and called at midday on
Lizaveta Nikolaevna. We went in almost together; I was also going to
make my first call. They were all, that is Liza, her mother, and Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, sitting in the big drawing-room, arguing. The mother was
asking Liza to play some waltz on the piano, and as soon as Liza began
to play the piece asked for, declared it was not the right one.
Mavriky Nikolaevitch in the simplicity of his heart took Liza's part,
maintaining that it was the right waltz. The elder lady was so angry
that she began to cry. She was ill and walked with difficulty. Her
legs were swollen, and for the last few days she had been continually
fractious, quarrelling with every one, though she always stood rather
in awe of Liza. They were pleased to see us. Liza flushed with pleasure,
and saying _"merci"_ to me, on Shatov's account of course, went to meet
him, looking at him with interest.

Shatov stopped awkwardly in the doorway. Thanking him for coming she led
him up to her mother.

"This is Mr. Shatov, of whom I have told you, and this is Mr. G----v, a
great friend of mine and of Stepan Trofimovitch's. Mavriky Nikolaevitch
made his acquaintance yesterday, too."

"And which is the professor?"

"There's no professor at all, maman."

"But there is. You said yourself that there'd be a professor. It's this
one, probably." She disdainfully indicated Shatov.

"I didn't tell you that there'd be a professor. Mr. G----v is
in the service, and Mr. Shatov is a former student."

"A student or professor, they all come from the university just the
same. You only want to argue. But the Swiss one had moustaches and a
beard."

"It's the son of Stepan Trofimovitch that maman always calls the
professor," said Liza, and she took Shatov away to the sofa at the other
end of the drawing-room.

"When her legs swell, she's always like this, you understand she's
ill," she whispered to Shatov, still with the same marked curiosity,
scrutinising him, especially his shock of hair.

"Are you an officer?" the old lady inquired of me. Liza had mercilessly
abandoned me to her.

"N-no.--I'm in the service...."

"Mr. G----v is a great friend of Stepan Trofimovitch's," Liza chimed in
immediately.

"Are you in Stepan Trofimovitch's service? Yes, and he's a professor,
too, isn't he?"

"Ah, maman, you must dream at night of professors," cried Liza with
annoyance.

"I see too many when I'm awake. But you always will contradict your
mother. Were you here four years ago when Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was in
the neighbourhood?"

I answered that I was.

"And there was some Englishman with you?"

"No, there was not."

Liza laughed.

"Well, you see there was no Englishman, so it must have been idle
gossip. And Varvara Petrovna and Stepan Trofimovitch both tell lies. And
they all tell lies."

"Auntie and Stepan Trofimovitch yesterday thought there was a
resemblance between Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and Prince Harry in
Shakespeare's _Henry IV_, and in answer to that maman says that there was
no Englishman here," Liza explained to us.

"If Harry wasn't here, there was no Englishman. It was no one else but
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at his tricks."

"I assure you that maman's doing it on purpose," Liza thought necessary
to explain to Shatov. "She's really heard of Shakespeare. I read her the
first act of _Othello_ myself. But she's in great pain now. Maman, listen,
it's striking twelve, it's time you took your medicine."

"The doctor's come," a maid-servant announced at the door.

The old lady got up and began calling her dog: "Zemirka, Zemirka, you
come with me at least."

Zemirka, a horrid little old dog, instead of obeying, crept under the
sofa where Liza was sitting.

"Don't you want to? Then I don't want you. Good-bye, my good sir, I
don't know your name or your father's," she said, addressing me.

"Anton Lavrentyevitch..."

"Well, it doesn't matter, with me it goes in at one ear and out of the
other. Don't you come with me, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, it was Zemirka I
called. Thank God I can still walk without help and to-morrow I shall go
for a drive."

She walked angrily out of the drawing-room.

"Anton Lavrentyevitch, will you talk meanwhile to Mavriky Nikolaevitch;
I assure you you'll both be gainers by getting to know one another
better," said Liza, and she gave a friendly smile to Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, who beamed all over as she looked at him. There was no
help for it, I remained to talk to Mavriky Nikolaevitch.


II

Lizaveta Nikolaevna's business with Shatov turned out, to my surprise,
to be really only concerned with literature. I had imagined, I don't
know why, that she had asked him to come with some other object. We,
Mavriky Nikolaevitch and I that is, seeing that they were talking aloud
and not trying to hide anything from us, began to listen, and at last
they asked our advice. It turned out that Lizaveta Nikolaevna was
thinking of bringing out a book which she thought would be of use,
but being quite inexperienced she needed some one to help her. The
earnestness with which she began to explain her plan to Shatov quite
surprised me.

"She must be one of the new people," I thought. "She has not been to
Switzerland for nothing."

Shatov listened with attention, his eyes fixed on the ground, showing
not the slightest surprise that a giddy young lady in society should
take up work that seemed so out of keeping with her.

Her literary scheme was as follows. Numbers of papers and journals are
published in the capitals and the provinces of Russia, and every day a
number of events are reported in them. The year passes, the newspapers
are everywhere folded up and put away in cupboards, or are torn up
and become litter, or are used for making parcels or wrapping things.
Numbers of these facts make an impression and are remembered by the
public, but in the course of years they are forgotten. Many people would
like to look them up, but it is a labour for them to embark upon this
sea of paper, often knowing nothing of the day or place or even year in
which the incident occurred. Yet if all the facts for a whole year were
brought together into one book, on a definite plan, and with a definite
object, under headings with references, arranged according to months and
days, such a compilation might reflect the characteristics of Russian
life for the whole year, even though the facts published are only a
small fraction of the events that take place.

"Instead of a number of newspapers there would be a few fat books,
that's all," observed Shatov.

But Lizaveta Nikolaevna clung to her idea, in spite of the difficulty
of carrying it out and her inability to describe it. "It ought to be
one book, and not even a very thick one," she maintained. But even if it
were thick it would be clear, for the great point would be the plan and
the character of the presentation of facts. Of course not all would
be collected and reprinted. The decrees and acts of government,
local regulations, laws--all such facts, however important, might be
altogether omitted from the proposed publication. They could leave out a
great deal and confine themselves to a selection of events more or
less characteristic of the moral life of the people, of the personal
character of the Russian people at the present moment. Of course
everything might be put in: strange incidents, fires, public
subscriptions, anything good or bad, every speech or word, perhaps even
floodings of the rivers, perhaps even some government decrees, but
only such things to be selected as are characteristic of the period;
everything would be put in with a certain view, a special significance
and intention, with an idea which would illuminate the facts looked
at in the aggregate, as a whole. And finally the book ought to be
interesting even for light reading, apart from its value as a work of
reference. It would be, so to say, a presentation of the spiritual,
moral, inner life of Russia for a whole year.

"We want every one to buy it, we want it to be a book that will be found
on every table," Liza declared. "I understand that all lies in the plan,
and that's why I apply to you," she concluded. She grew very warm over
it, and although her explanation was obscure and incomplete, Shatov
began to understand.

"So it would amount to something with a political tendency, a selection
of facts with a special tendency," he muttered, still not raising his
head.

"Not at all, we must not select with a particular bias, and we ought
not to have any political tendency in it. Nothing but impartiality--that
will be the only tendency."

"But a tendency would be no harm," said Shatov, with a slight movement,
"and one can hardly avoid it if there is any selection at all. The very
selection of facts will suggest how they are to be understood. Your idea
is not a bad one."

"Then such a book is possible?" cried Liza delightedly.

"We must look into it and consider. It's an immense undertaking. One
can't work it out on the spur of the moment. We need experience. And
when we do publish the book I doubt whether we shall find out how to
do it. Possibly after many trials; but the thought is alluring. It's a
useful idea."

He raised his eyes at last, and they were positively sparkling with
pleasure, he was so interested.

"Was it your own idea?" he asked Liza, in a friendly and, as it were,
bashful way.

"The idea's no trouble, you know, it's the plan is the trouble," Liza
smiled. "I understand very little. I am not very clever, and I only
pursue what is clear to me, myself...."

"Pursue?"

"Perhaps that's not the right word?" Liza inquired quickly.

"The word is all right; I meant nothing."

"I thought while I was abroad that even I might be of some use. I have
money of my own lying idle. Why shouldn't I--even I--work for the common
cause? Besides, the idea somehow occurred to me all at once of itself.
I didn't invent it at all, and was delighted with it. But I saw at
once that I couldn't get on without some one to help, because I am not
competent to do anything of myself. My helper, of course, would be the
co-editor of the book. We would go halves. You would give the plan and
the work. Mine would be the original idea and the means for publishing
it. Would the book pay its expenses, do you think?"

"If we hit on a good plan the book will go."

"I warn you that I am not doing it for profit; but I am very anxious
that the book should circulate and should be very proud of making a
profit."

"Well, but how do I come in?"

"Why, I invite you to be my fellow-worker, to go halves. You will think
out the plan."

"How do you know that I am capable of thinking out the plan?"

"People have talked about you to me, and here I've heard
... I know that you are very clever and... are working for the cause ...
and think a great deal. Pyotr Stepanovitch Verhovensky spoke about you
in Switzerland," she added hurriedly. "He's a very clever man, isn't
he?"

Shatov stole a fleeting, momentary glance at her, but dropped his eyes
again.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch told me a great deal about you, too."

Shatov suddenly turned red.

"But here are the newspapers." Liza hurriedly picked up from a chair
a bundle of newspapers that lay tied up ready. "I've tried to mark
the facts here for selection, to sort them, and I have put the papers
together... you will see."

Shatov took the bundle.

"Take them home and look at them. Where do you live?"

"In Bogoyavlensky Street, Filipov's house."

"I know. I think it's there, too, I've been told, a captain lives,
beside you, Mr. Lebyadkin," said Liza in the same hurried manner.

Shatov sat for a full minute with the bundle in his outstretched hand,
making no answer and staring at the floor.

"You'd better find some one else for these jobs. I shouldn't suit you at
all," he brought out at last, dropping his voice in an awfully strange
way, almost to a whisper.

Liza flushed crimson.

"What jobs are you speaking of? Mavriky Nikolaevitch," she cried,
"please bring that letter here."

I too followed Mavriky Nikolaevitch to the table.

"Look at this," she turned suddenly to me, unfolding the letter in great
excitement. "Have you ever seen anything like it. Please read it aloud.
I want Mr. Shatov to hear it too."

With no little astonishment I read aloud the following missive:

     "To the Perfection, Miss Tushin.

"Gracious Lady
    "Lizaveta Nikolaevna!

    "Oh, she's a sweet queen,
     Lizaveta Tushin!
     When on side-saddle she gallops by,
     And in the breeze her fair tresses fly!
     Or when with her mother in church she bows low
     And on devout faces a red flush doth flow!
     Then for the joys of lawful wedlock I aspire,
     And follow her and her mother with tears of desire.

"Composed by an unlearned man in the midst of a discussion.

"Gracious Lady!

"I pity myself above all men that I did not lose my arm at Sevastopol,
not having been there at all, but served all the campaign delivering
paltry provisions, which I look on as a degradation. You are a goddess
of antiquity, and I am nothing, but have had a glimpse of infinity.
Look on it as a poem and no more, for, after all, poetry is nonsense and
justifies what would be considered impudence in prose. Can the sun be
angry with the infusoria if the latter composes verses to her from the
drop of water, where there is a multitude of them if you look through
the microscope? Even the club for promoting humanity to the larger
animals in tip-top society in Petersburg, which rightly feels compassion
for dogs and horses, despises the brief infusoria making no reference
to it whatever, because it is not big enough. I'm not big enough either.
The idea of marriage might seem droll, but soon I shall have property
worth two hundred souls through a misanthropist whom you ought to
despise. I can tell a lot and I can undertake to produce documents
that would mean Siberia. Don't despise my proposal. A letter from an
infusoria is of course in verse.

"Captain Lebyadkin your most humble friend.

"And he has time no end."


"That was written by a man in a drunken condition, a worthless fellow,"
I cried indignantly. "I know him."

"That letter I received yesterday," Liza began to explain, flushing
and speaking hurriedly. "I saw myself, at once, that it came from some
foolish creature, and I haven't yet shown it to maman, for fear of
upsetting her more. But if he is going to keep on like that, I don't
know how to act. Mavriky Nikolaevitch wants to go out and forbid him to
do it. As I have looked upon you as a colleague," she turned to Shatov,
"and as you live there, I wanted to question you so as to judge what
more is to be expected of him."

"He's a drunkard and a worthless fellow," Shatov muttered with apparent
reluctance.

"Is he always so stupid?"

"No, he's not stupid at all when he's not drunk."

"I used to know a general who wrote verses exactly like that," I
observed, laughing.

"One can see from the letter that he is clever enough for his own
purposes," Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had till then been silent, put in
unexpectedly.

"He lives with some sister?" Liza queried.

"Yes, with his sister."

"They say he tyrannises over her, is that true?"

Shatov looked at Liza again, scowled, and muttering, "What business is
it of mine?" moved towards the door.

"Ah, stay!" cried Liza, in a flutter. "Where are you going? We have so
much still to talk over...."

"What is there to talk over? I'll let you know to-morrow."

"Why, the most important thing of all--the printing-press! Do believe me
that I am not in jest, that I really want to work in good earnest!" Liza
assured him in growing agitation. "If we decide to publish it, where is
it to be printed? You know it's a most important question, for we shan't
go to Moscow for it, and the printing-press here is out of the
question for such a publication. I made up my mind long ago to set up
a printing-press of my own, in your name perhaps--and I know maman will
allow it so long as it is in your name...."

"How do you know that I could be a printer?" Shatov asked sullenly.

"Why, Pyotr Stepanovitch told me of you in Switzerland, and referred
me to you as one who knows the business and able to set up a
printing-press. He even meant to give me a note to you from himself, but
I forgot it."

Shatov's face changed, as I recollect now. He stood for a few seconds
longer, then went out of the room.

Liza was angry.

"Does he always go out like that?" she asked, turning to me.

I was just shrugging my shoulders when Shatov suddenly came back, went
straight up to the table and put down the roll of papers he had taken.

"I'm not going to be your helper, I haven't the time...."

"Why? Why? I think you are angry!" Liza asked him in a grieved and
imploring voice.

The sound of her voice seemed to strike him; for some moments he looked
at her intently, as though trying to penetrate to her very soul.

