
"Oh, all right. I'd quite forgotten it and hadn't read it; I haven't had
time. I really don't know, it's not in my pockets... it must be on my
table. Don't be uneasy, it will be found."

"No, I'd better send to your rooms at once. It might be lost; besides,
it might be stolen."

"Oh, who'd want it! But why are you so alarmed? Why, Yulia Mihailovna
told me you always have several copies made--one kept at a notary's
abroad, another in Petersburg, a third in Moscow, and then you send some
to a bank, I believe."

"But Moscow might be burnt again and my manuscript with it. No, I'd
better send at once."

"Stay, here it is!" Pyotr Stepanovitch pulled a roll of note-paper
out of a pocket at the back of his coat. "It's a little crumpled. Only
fancy, it's been lying there with my pocket-handkerchief ever since I
took it from you; I forgot it."

Karmazinov greedily snatched the manuscript, carefully examined it,
counted the pages, and laid it respectfully beside him on a special
table, for the time, in such a way that he would not lose sight of it
for an instant.

"You don't read very much, it seems?" he hissed, unable to restrain
himself.

"No, not very much."

"And nothing in the way of Russian literature?"

"In the way of Russian literature? Let me see, I have read
something.... 'On the Way' or 'Away!' or 'At the Parting of the Ways'--
something of the sort; I don't remember. It's a long time since I read
it, five years ago. I've no time."

A silence followed.

"When I came I assured every one that you were a very intelligent man,
and now I believe every one here is wild over you."

"Thank you," Pyotr Stepanovitch answered calmly.

Lunch was brought in. Pyotr Stepanovitch pounced on the cutlet with
extraordinary appetite, had eaten it in a trice, tossed off the wine and
swallowed his coffee.

"This boor," thought Karmazinov, looking at him askance as he munched
the last morsel and drained the last drops--"this boor probably
understood the biting taunt in my words... and no doubt he has read
the manuscript with eagerness; he is simply lying with some object. But
possibly he is not lying and is only genuinely stupid. I like a genius
to be rather stupid. Mayn't he be a sort of genius among them? Devil
take the fellow!"

He got up from the sofa and began pacing from one end of the room to the
other for the sake of exercise, as he always did after lunch.

"Leaving here soon?" asked Pyotr Stepanovitch from his easy chair,
lighting a cigarette.

"I really came to sell an estate and I am in the hands of my bailiff."

"You left, I believe, because they expected an epidemic out there after
the war?"

"N-no, not entirely for that reason," Mr. Karmazinov went on, uttering
his phrases with an affable intonation, and each time he turned round in
pacing the corner there was a faint but jaunty quiver of his right leg.
"I certainly intend to live as long as I can." He laughed, not without
venom. "There is something in our Russian nobility that makes them wear
out very quickly, from every point of view. But I wish to wear out as
late as possible, and now I am going abroad for good; there the climate
is better, the houses are of stone, and everything stronger. Europe will
last my time, I think. What do you think?"

"How can I tell?"

"H'm. If the Babylon out there really does fall, and great will be the
fall thereof (about which I quite agree with you, yet I think it will
last my time), there's nothing to fall here in Russia, comparatively
speaking. There won't be stones to fall, everything will crumble into
dirt. Holy Russia has less power of resistance than anything in the
world. The Russian peasantry is still held together somehow by the
Russian God; but according to the latest accounts the Russian God is not
to be relied upon, and scarcely survived the emancipation; it certainly
gave Him a severe shock. And now, what with railways, what with you...
I've no faith in the Russian God."

"And how about the European one?"

"I don't believe in any. I've been slandered to the youth of Russia.
I've always sympathised with every movement among them. I was shown the
manifestoes here. Every one looks at them with perplexity because they
are frightened at the way things are put in them, but every one is
convinced of their power even if they don't admit it to themselves.
Everybody has been rolling downhill, and every one has known for ages
that they have nothing to clutch at. I am persuaded of the success of
this mysterious propaganda, if only because Russia is now pre-eminently
the place in all the world where anything you like may happen without
any opposition. I understand only too well why wealthy Russians all
flock abroad, and more and more so every year. It's simply instinct. If
the ship is sinking, the rats are the first to leave it. Holy Russia is
a country of wood, of poverty... and of danger, the country of ambitious
beggars in its upper classes, while the immense majority live in poky
little huts. She will be glad of any way of escape; you have only to
present it to her. It's only the government that still means to
resist, but it brandishes its cudgel in the dark and hits its own men.
Everything here is doomed and awaiting the end. Russia as she is has no
future. I have become a German and I am proud of it."

"But you began about the manifestoes. Tell me everything; how do you
look at them?"

"Every one is afraid of them, so they must be influential. They openly
unmask what is false and prove that there is nothing to lay hold of
among us, and nothing to lean upon. They speak aloud while all is
silent. What is most effective about them (in spite of their style) is
the incredible boldness with which they look the truth straight in the
face. To look facts straight in the face is only possible to Russians of
this generation. No, in Europe they are not yet so bold; it is a realm
of stone, there there is still something to lean upon. So far as I see
and am able to judge, the whole essence of the Russian revolutionary
idea lies in the negation of honour. I like its being so boldly and
fearlessly expressed. No, in Europe they wouldn't understand it yet, but
that's just what we shall clutch at. For a Russian a sense of honour is
only a superfluous burden, and it always has been a burden through all
his history. The open 'right to dishonour' will attract him more than
anything. I belong to the older generation and, I must confess, still
cling to honour, but only from habit. It is only that I prefer the old
forms, granted it's from timidity; you see one must live somehow what's
left of one's life."

He suddenly stopped.

"I am talking," he thought, "while he holds his tongue and watches me.
He has come to make me ask him a direct question. And I shall ask him."

"Yulia Mihailovna asked me by some stratagem to find out from you what
the surprise is that you are preparing for the ball to-morrow," Pyotr
Stepanovitch asked suddenly.

"Yes, there really will be a surprise and I certainly shall
astonish..." said Karmazinov with increased dignity. "But I won't tell
you what the secret is."

Pyotr Stepanovitch did not insist.

"There is a young man here called Shatov," observed the great writer.
"Would you believe it, I haven't seen him."

"A very nice person. What about him?"

"Oh, nothing. He talks about something. Isn't he the person who gave
Stavrogin that slap in the face?"

"Yes."

"And what's your opinion of Stavrogin?"

"I don't know; he is such a flirt."

Karmazinov detested Stavrogin because it was the latter's habit not to
take any notice of him.

"That flirt," he said, chuckling, "if what is advocated in your
manifestoes ever comes to pass, will be the first to be hanged."

"Perhaps before," Pyotr Stepanovitch said suddenly.

"Quite right too," Karmazinov assented, not laughing, and with
pronounced gravity.

"You have said so once before, and, do you know, I repeated it to him."

"What, you surely didn't repeat it?" Karmazinov laughed again.

"He said that if he were to be hanged it would be enough for you to
be flogged, not simply as a compliment but to hurt, as they flog the
peasants."

Pyotr Stepanovitch took his hat and got up from his seat. Karmazinov
held out both hands to him at parting.

"And what if all that you are... plotting for is destined to come
to pass..." he piped suddenly, in a honeyed voice with a peculiar
intonation, still holding his hands in his. "How soon could it come
about?"

"How could I tell?" Pyotr Stepanovitch answered rather roughly. They
looked intently into each other's eyes.

"At a guess? Approximately?" Karmazinov piped still more sweetly.

"You'll have time to sell your estate and time to clear out too," Pyotr
Stepanovitch muttered still more roughly. They looked at one another
even more intently.

There was a minute of silence.

"It will begin early next May and will be over by October," Pyotr
Stepanovitch said suddenly.

"I thank you sincerely," Karmazinov pronounced in a voice saturated with
feeling, pressing his hands.

"You will have time to get out of the ship, you rat," Pyotr Stepanovitch
was thinking as he went out into the street. "Well, if that 'imperial
intellect' inquires so confidently of the day and the hour and thanks
me so respectfully for the information I have given, we mustn't doubt
of ourselves. [He grinned.] H'm! But he really isn't stupid... and he is
simply a rat escaping; men like that don't tell tales!"

He ran to Filipov's house in Bogoyavlensky Street.


VI

Pyotr Stepanovitch went first to Kirillov's. He found him, as usual,
alone, and at the moment practising gymnastics, that is, standing with
his legs apart, brandishing his arms above his head in a peculiar way.
On the floor lay a ball. The tea stood cold on the table, not cleared
since breakfast. Pyotr Stepanovitch stood for a minute on the threshold.

"You are very anxious about your health, it seems," he said in a loud
and cheerful tone, going into the room. "What a jolly ball, though; foo,
how it bounces! Is that for gymnastics too?"

Kirillov put on his coat.

"Yes, that's for the good of my health too," he muttered dryly. "Sit
down."

"I'm only here for a minute. Still, I'll sit down. Health is all very
well, but I've come to remind you of our agreement. The appointed time
is approaching... in a certain sense," he concluded awkwardly.

"What agreement?"

"How can you ask?" Pyotr Stepanovitch was startled and even dismayed.

"It's not an agreement and not an obligation. I have not bound myself in
any way; it's a mistake on your part."

"I say, what's this you're doing?" Pyotr Stepanovitch jumped up.

"What I choose."

"What do you choose?"

"The same as before."

"How am I to understand that? Does that mean that you are in the same
mind?"

"Yes. Only there's no agreement and never has been, and I have not bound
myself in any way. I could do as I like and I can still do as I like."

Kirillov explained himself curtly and contemptuously.

"I agree, I agree; be as free as you like if you don't change your
mind." Pyotr Stepanovitch sat down again with a satisfied air. "You are
angry over a word. You've become very irritable of late; that's why
I've avoided coming to see you, I was quite sure, though, you would be
loyal."

"I dislike you very much, but you can be perfectly sure--though I don't
regard it as loyalty and disloyalty."

"But do you know" (Pyotr Stepanovitch was startled again) "we must talk
things over thoroughly again so as not to get in a muddle. The business
needs accuracy, and you keep giving me such shocks. Will you let me
speak?"

"Speak," snapped Kirillov, looking away.

"You made up your mind long ago to take your life... I mean, you had the
idea in your mind. Is that the right expression? Is there any mistake
about that?"

"I have the same idea still."

"Excellent. Take note that no one has forced it on you."

"Rather not; what nonsense you talk."

"I dare say I express it very stupidly. Of course, it would be very
stupid to force anybody to it. I'll go on. You were a member of the
society before its organisation was changed, and confessed it to one of
the members."

"I didn't confess it, I simply said so."

"Quite so. And it would be absurd to confess such a thing. What a
confession! You simply said so. Excellent."

"No, it's not excellent, for you are being tedious. I am not obliged to
give you any account of myself and you can't understand my ideas. I want
to put an end to my life, because that's my idea, because I don't want
to be afraid of death, because... because there's no need for you to
know. What do you want? Would you like tea? It's cold. Let me get you
another glass."

Pyotr Stepanovitch actually had taken up the teapot and was looking for
an empty glass. Kirillov went to the cupboard and brought a clean glass.

"I've just had lunch at Karmazinov's," observed his visitor, "then
I listened to him talking, and perspired and got into a sweat again
running here. I am fearfully thirsty."

"Drink. Cold tea is good."

Kirillov sat down on his chair again and again fixed his eyes on the
farthest corner.

"The idea had arisen in the society," he went on in the same voice,
"that I might be of use if I killed myself, and that when you get up
some bit of mischief here, and they are looking for the guilty, I might
suddenly shoot myself and leave a letter saying I did it all, so that
you might escape suspicion for another year."

"For a few days, anyway; one day is precious."

"Good. So for that reason they asked me, if I would, to wait. I said I'd
wait till the society fixed the day, because it makes no difference to
me."

"Yes, but remember that you bound yourself not to make up your last
letter without me and that in Russia you would be at my... well, at
my disposition, that is for that purpose only. I need hardly say, in
everything else, of course, you are free," Pyotr Stepanovitch added
almost amiably.

"I didn't bind myself, I agreed, because it makes no difference to me."

"Good, good. I have no intention of wounding your vanity, but..."

"It's not a question of vanity."

"But remember that a hundred and twenty thalers were collected for your
journey, so you've taken money."

"Not at all." Kirillov fired up. "The money was not on that condition.
One doesn't take money for that."

"People sometimes do."

"That's a lie. I sent a letter from Petersburg, and in Petersburg I paid
you a hundred and twenty thalers; I put it in your hand... and it has
been sent off there, unless you've kept it for yourself."

"All right, all right, I don't dispute anything; it has been sent off.
All that matters is that you are still in the same mind."

"Exactly the same. When you come and tell me it's time, I'll carry it
all out. Will it be very soon?"

"Not very many days.... But remember, we'll make up the letter together,
the same night."

"The same day if you like. You say I must take the responsibility for
the manifestoes on myself?"

"And something else too."

"I am not going to make myself out responsible for everything."

"What won't you be responsible for?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch again.

"What I don't choose; that's enough. I don't want to talk about it any
more."

Pyotr Stepanovitch controlled himself and changed the subject.

"To speak of something else," he began, "will you be with us this
evening? It's Virginsky's name-day; that's the pretext for our meeting."

"I don't want to."

"Do me a favour. Do come. You must. We must impress them by our number
and our looks. You have a face... well, in one word, you have a fateful
face."

"You think so?" laughed Kirillov. "Very well, I'll come, but not for the
sake of my face. What time is it?"

"Oh, quite early, half-past six. And, you know, you can go in, sit down,
and not speak to any one, however many there may be there. Only, I say,
don't forget to bring pencil and paper with you."

"What's that for?"

"Why, it makes no difference to you, and it's my special request. You'll
only have to sit still, speaking to no one, listen, and sometimes seem
to make a note. You can draw something, if you like."

"What nonsense! What for?"

"Why, since it makes no difference to you! You keep saying that it's
just the same to you."

"No, what for?"

"Why, because that member of the society, the inspector, has stopped at
Moscow and I told some of them here that possibly the inspector may turn
up to-night; and they'll think that you are the inspector. And as you've
been here three weeks already, they'll be still more surprised."

"Stage tricks. You haven't got an inspector in Moscow."

"Well, suppose I haven't--damn him!--what business is that of yours
and what bother will it be to you? You are a member of the society
yourself."

"Tell them I am the inspector; I'll sit still and hold my tongue, but I
won't have the pencil and paper."

"But why?"

"I don't want to."

Pyotr Stepanovitch was really angry; he turned positively green, but
again he controlled himself. He got up and took his hat.

"Is that fellow with you?" he brought out suddenly, in a low voice.

"Yes."

"That's good. I'll soon get him away. Don't be uneasy."

"I am not uneasy. He is only here at night. The old woman is in the
hospital, her daughter-in-law is dead. I've been alone for the last two
days. I've shown him the place in the paling where you can take a board
out; he gets through, no one sees."

"I'll take him away soon."

"He says he has got plenty of places to stay the night in."

"That's rot; they are looking for him, but here he wouldn't be noticed.
Do you ever get into talk with him?"

"Yes, at night. He abuses you tremendously. I've been reading the
'Apocalypse' to him at night, and we have tea. He listened eagerly, very
eagerly, the whole night."

"Hang it all, you'll convert him to Christianity!"

"He is a Christian as it is. Don't be uneasy, he'll do the murder. Whom
do you want to murder?"

"No, I don't want him for that, I want him for something different....
And does Shatov know about Fedka?"

"I don't talk to Shatov, and I don't see him."

"Is he angry?"

"No, we are not angry, only we shun one another. We lay too long side by
side in America."

"I am going to him directly."

"As you like."

"Stavrogin and I may come and see you from there, about ten o'clock."

"Do."

"I want to talk to him about something important.... I say, make me
a present of your ball; what do you want with it now? I want it for
gymnastics too. I'll pay you for it if you like."

"You can take it without."

Pyotr Stepanovitch put the ball in the back pocket of his coat.

"But I'll give you nothing against Stavrogin," Kirillov muttered after
his guest, as he saw him out. The latter looked at him in amazement but
did not answer.

Kirillov's last words perplexed Pyotr Stepanovitch extremely; he had not
time yet to discover their meaning, but even while he was on the stairs
of Shatov's lodging he tried to remove all trace of annoyance and to
assume an amiable expression. Shatov was at home and rather unwell. He
was lying on his bed, though dressed.

"What bad luck!" Pyotr Stepanovitch cried out in the doorway. "Are you
really ill?"

The amiable expression of his face suddenly vanished; there was a gleam
of spite in his eyes.

"Not at all." Shatov jumped up nervously. "I am not ill at all... a
little headache..."

He was disconcerted; the sudden appearance of such a visitor positively
alarmed him.

"You mustn't be ill for the job I've come about," Pyotr Stepanovitch
began quickly and, as it were, peremptorily. "Allow me to sit down." (He
sat down.) "And you sit down again on your bedstead; that's right. There
will be a party of our fellows at Virginsky's to-night on the pretext of
his birthday; it will have no political character, however--we've seen
to that. I am coming with Nikolay Stavrogin. I would not, of course,
have dragged you there, knowing your way of thinking at present...
simply to save your being worried, not because we think you would betray
us. But as things have turned out, you will have to go. You'll meet
there the very people with whom we shall finally settle how you are
to leave the society and to whom you are to hand over what is in your
keeping. We'll do it without being noticed; I'll take you aside into a
corner; there'll be a lot of people and there's no need for every one to
know. I must confess I've had to keep my tongue wagging on your behalf;
but now I believe they've agreed, on condition you hand over the
printing press and all the papers, of course. Then you can go where you
please."

Shatov listened, frowning and resentful. The nervous alarm of a moment
before had entirely left him.

"I don't acknowledge any sort of obligation to give an account to the
devil knows whom," he declared definitely. "No one has the authority to
set me free."

"Not quite so. A great deal has been entrusted to you. You hadn't the
right to break off simply. Besides, you made no clear statement about
it, so that you put them in an ambiguous position."

"I stated my position clearly by letter as soon as I arrived here."

"No, it wasn't clear," Pyotr Stepanovitch retorted calmly. "I sent you
'A Noble Personality' to be printed here, and meaning the copies to be
kept here till they were wanted; and the two manifestoes as well. You
returned them with an ambiguous letter which explained nothing."

"I refused definitely to print them."

"Well, not definitely. You wrote that you couldn't, but you didn't
explain for what reason. 'I can't' doesn't mean 'I don't want to.' It
might be supposed that you were simply unable through circumstances.
That was how they took it, and considered that you still meant to keep
up your connection with the society, so that they might have entrusted
something to you again and so have compromised themselves. They say here
that you simply meant to deceive them, so that you might betray them
when you got hold of something important. I have defended you to the
best of my powers, and have shown your brief note as evidence in your
favour. But I had to admit on rereading those two lines that they were
misleading and not conclusive."

"You kept that note so carefully then?"

"My keeping it means nothing; I've got it still."

"Well, I don't care, damn it!" Shatov cried furiously. "Your fools may
consider that I've betrayed them if they like--what is it to me? I
should like to see what you can do to me?"

"Your name would be noted, and at the first success of the revolution
you would be hanged."

"That's when you get the upper hand and dominate Russia?"

"You needn't laugh. I tell you again, I stood up for you. Anyway, I
advise you to turn up to-day. Why waste words through false pride?
Isn't it better to part friends? In any case you'll have to give up the
printing press and the old type and papers--that's what we must talk
about."

"I'll come," Shatov muttered, looking down thoughtfully.

Pyotr Stepanovitch glanced askance at him from his place.

"Will Stavrogin be there?" Shatov asked suddenly, raising his head.

"He is certain to be."

"Ha ha!"

Again they were silent for a minute. Shatov grinned disdainfully and
irritably.

"And that contemptible 'Noble Personality' of yours, that I wouldn't
print here. Has it been printed?" he asked.

"Yes."

"To make the schoolboys believe that Herzen himself had written it in
your album?"

"Yes, Herzen himself."

Again they were silent for three minutes. At last Shatov got up from the
bed.

"Go out of my room; I don't care to sit with you."

"I'm going," Pyotr Stepanovitch brought out with positive alacrity,
getting up at once. "Only one word: Kirillov is quite alone in the lodge
now, isn't he, without a servant?"

"Quite alone. Get along; I can't stand being in the same room with you."

"Well, you are a pleasant customer now!" Pyotr Stepanovitch reflected
gaily as he went out into the street, "and you will be pleasant this
evening too, and that just suits me; nothing better could be wished,
nothing better could be wished! The Russian God Himself seems helping
me."


VII

He had probably been very busy that day on all sorts of errands and
probably with success, which was reflected in the self-satisfied
expression of his face when at six o'clock that evening he turned up at
Stavrogin's. But he was not at once admitted: Stavrogin had just locked
himself in the study with Mavriky Nikolaevitch. This news instantly made
Pyotr Stepanovitch anxious. He seated himself close to the study door
to wait for the visitor to go away. He could hear conversation but could
not catch the words. The visit did not last long; soon he heard a noise,
the sound of an extremely loud and abrupt voice, then the door opened
and Mavriky Nikolaevitch came out with a very pale face. He did not
notice Pyotr Stepanovitch, and quickly passed by. Pyotr Stepanovitch
instantly ran into the study.

I cannot omit a detailed account of the very brief interview that had
taken place between the two "rivals"--an interview which might well
have seemed impossible under the circumstances, but which had yet taken
place.

This is how it had come about. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had been enjoying
an after-dinner nap on the couch in his study when Alexey Yegorytch had
announced the unexpected visitor. Hearing the name, he had positively
leapt up, unwilling to believe it. But soon a smile gleamed on his
lips--a smile of haughty triumph and at the same time of a blank,
incredulous wonder. The visitor, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, seemed struck by
the expression of that smile as he came in; anyway, he stood still in
the middle of the room as though uncertain whether to come further in or
to turn back. Stavrogin succeeded at once in transforming the expression
of his face, and with an air of grave surprise took a step towards him.
The visitor did not take his outstretched hand, but awkwardly moved a
chair and, not uttering a word, sat down without waiting for his host to
do so. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat down on the sofa facing him obliquely
and, looking at Mavriky Nikolaevitch, waited in silence.

"If you can, marry Lizaveta Nikolaevna," Mavriky Nikolaevitch brought
out suddenly at last, and what was most curious, it was impossible
to tell from his tone whether it was an entreaty, a recommendation, a
surrender, or a command.

Stavrogin still remained silent, but the visitor had evidently said all
he had come to say and gazed at him persistently, waiting for an answer.

"If I am not mistaken (but it's quite certain), Lizaveta Nikolaevna is
already betrothed to you," Stavrogin said at last.

"Promised and betrothed," Mavriky Nikolaevitch assented firmly and
clearly.

"You have... quarrelled? Excuse me, Mavriky Nikolaevitch."

"No, she 'loves and respects me'; those are her words. Her words are
more precious than anything."

"Of that there can be no doubt."

"But let me tell you, if she were standing in the church at her wedding
and you were to call her, she'd give up me and every one and go to you."

"From the wedding?"

"Yes, and after the wedding."

"Aren't you making a mistake?"

"No. Under her persistent, sincere, and intense hatred for you love is
flashing out at every moment... and madness... the sincerest infinite
love and... madness! On the contrary, behind the love she feels for me,
which is sincere too, every moment there are flashes of hatred... the
most intense hatred! I could never have fancied all these transitions...
before."

"But I wonder, though, how could you come here and dispose of the hand
of Lizaveta Nikolaevna? Have you the right to do so? Has she authorised
you?"

Mavriky Nikolaevitch frowned and for a minute he looked down.

"That's all words on your part," he brought out suddenly, "words of
revenge and triumph; I am sure you can read between the lines, and is
this the time for petty vanity? Haven't you satisfaction enough? Must I
really dot my i's and go into it all? Very well, I will dot my i's, if
you are so anxious for my humiliation. I have no right, it's impossible
for me to be authorised; Lizaveta Nikolaevna knows nothing about it
and her betrothed has finally lost his senses and is only fit for a
madhouse, and, to crown everything, has come to tell you so himself. You
are the only man in the world who can make her happy, and I am the one
to make her unhappy. You are trying to get her, you are pursuing her,
but--I don't know why--you won't marry her. If it's because of a lovers'
quarrel abroad and I must be sacrificed to end it, sacrifice me. She is
too unhappy and I can't endure it. My words are not a sanction, not a
prescription, and so it's no slur on your pride. If you care to take
my place at the altar, you can do it without any sanction from me, and
there is no ground for me to come to you with a mad proposal, especially
as our marriage is utterly impossible after the step I am taking now. I
cannot lead her to the altar feeling myself an abject wretch. What I am
doing here and my handing her over to you, perhaps her bitterest foe, is
to my mind something so abject that I shall never get over it."

"Will you shoot yourself on our wedding day?"

"No, much later. Why stain her bridal dress with my blood? Perhaps I
shall not shoot myself at all, either now or later."

"I suppose you want to comfort me by saying that?"

"You? What would the blood of one more mean to you?" He turned pale and
his eyes gleamed. A minute of silence followed.

"Excuse me for the questions I've asked you," Stavrogin began again;
"some of them I had no business to ask you, but one of them I think I
have every right to put to you. Tell me, what facts have led you to
form a conclusion as to my feelings for Lizaveta Nikolaevna? I mean to
a conviction of a degree of feeling on my part as would justify your
coming here... and risking such a proposal."

"What?" Mavriky Nikolaevitch positively started. "Haven't you been
trying to win her? Aren't you trying to win her, and don't you want to
win her?"

"Generally speaking, I can't speak of my feeling for this woman or that
to a third person or to anyone except the woman herself. You must excuse
it, it's a constitutional peculiarity. But to make up for it, I'll tell
you the truth about everything else; I am married, and it's impossible
for me either to marry or to try 'to win' anyone."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was so astounded that he started back in his chair
and for some time stared fixedly into Stavrogin's face.

"Only fancy, I never thought of that," he muttered. "You said then, that
morning, that you were not married... and so I believed you were not
married."

He turned terribly pale; suddenly he brought his fist down on the table
with all his might.

"If after that confession you don't leave Lizaveta Nikolaevna alone,
if you make her unhappy, I'll kill you with my stick like a dog in a
ditch!"

He jumped up and walked quickly out of the room. Pyotr Stepanovitch,
running in, found his host in a most unexpected frame of mind.

"Ah, that's you!" Stavrogin laughed loudly; his laughter seemed to be
provoked simply by the appearance of Pyotr Stepanovitch as he ran in
with such impulsive curiosity.

"Were you listening at the door? Wait a bit. What have you come about?
I promised you something, didn't I? Ah, bah! I remember, to meet 'our
fellows.' Let us go. I am delighted. You couldn't have thought of
anything more appropriate." He snatched up his hat and they both went at
once out of the house.

"Are you laughing beforehand at the prospect of seeing 'our fellows'?"
chirped gaily Pyotr Stepanovitch, dodging round him with obsequious
alacrity, at one moment trying to walk beside his companion on the
narrow brick pavement and at the next running right into the mud of
the road; for Stavrogin walked in the middle of the pavement without
observing that he left no room for anyone else.

"I am not laughing at all," he answered loudly and gaily; "on the
contrary, I am sure that you have the most serious set of people there."

"'Surly dullards,' as you once deigned to express it."

"Nothing is more amusing sometimes than a surly dullard."

"Ah, you mean Mavriky Nikolaevitch? I am convinced he came to give up
his betrothed to you, eh? I egged him on to do it, indirectly, would you
believe it? And if he doesn't give her up, we'll take her, anyway, won't
we--eh?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch knew no doubt that he was running some risk in
venturing on such sallies, but when he was excited he preferred to risk
anything rather than to remain in uncertainty. Stavrogin only laughed.

"You still reckon you'll help me?" he asked.

"If you call me. But you know there's one way, and the best one."

"Do I know your way?"

"Oh no, that's a secret for the time. Only remember, a secret has its
price."

"I know what it costs," Stavrogin muttered to himself, but he restrained
himself and was silent.

"What it costs? What did you say?" Pyotr Stepanovitch was startled.

"I said, 'Damn you and your secret!' You'd better be telling me who will
be there. I know that we are going to a name-day party, but who will be
there?"

"Oh, all sorts! Even Kirillov."

"All members of circles?"

"Hang it all, you are in a hurry! There's not one circle formed yet."

"How did you manage to distribute so many manifestoes then?"

"Where we are going only four are members of the circle. The others on
probation are spying on one another with jealous eagerness, and bring
reports to me. They are a trustworthy set. It's all material which
we must organise, and then we must clear out. But you wrote the rules
yourself, there's no need to explain."

"Are things going badly then? Is there a hitch?"

"Going? Couldn't be better. It will amuse you: the first thing which has
a tremendous effect is giving them titles. Nothing has more influence
than a title. I invent ranks and duties on purpose; I have secretaries,
secret spies, treasurers, presidents, registrars, their assistants--they
like it awfully, it's taken capitally. Then, the next force is
sentimentalism, of course. You know, amongst us socialism spreads
principally through sentimentalism. But the trouble is these lieutenants
who bite; sometimes you put your foot in it. Then come the out-and-out
rogues; well, they are a good sort, if you like, and sometimes very
useful; but they waste a lot of one's time, they want incessant looking
after. And the most important force of all--the cement that holds
everything together--is their being ashamed of having an opinion
of their own. That is a force! And whose work is it, whose precious
achievement is it, that not one idea of their own is left in their
heads! They think originality a disgrace."

"If so, why do you take so much trouble?"

"Why, if people lie simply gaping at every one, how can you resist
annexing them? Can you seriously refuse to believe in the possibility
of success? Yes, you have the faith, but one wants will. It's just with
people like this that success is possible. I tell you I could make them
go through fire; one has only to din it into them that they are not
advanced enough. The fools reproach me that I have taken in every one
here over the central committee and 'the innumerable branches.' You once
blamed me for it yourself, but where's the deception? You and I are the
central committee and there will be as many branches as we like."

"And always the same sort of rabble!"

"Raw material. Even they will be of use."

"And you are still reckoning on me?"

"You are the chief, you are the head; I shall only be a subordinate,
your secretary. We shall take to our barque, you know; the oars are of
maple, the sails are of silk, at the helm sits a fair maiden, Lizaveta
Nikolaevna... hang it, how does it go in the ballad?"

"He is stuck," laughed Stavrogin. "No, I'd better give you my version.
There you reckon on your fingers the forces that make up the circles.
All that business of titles and sentimentalism is a very good cement,
but there is something better; persuade four members of the circle to
do for a fifth on the pretence that he is a traitor, and you'll tie
them all together with the blood they've shed as though it were a knot.
They'll be your slaves, they won't dare to rebel or call you to account.
Ha ha ha!"

"But you... you shall pay for those words," Pyotr Stepanovitch thought
to himself, "and this very evening, in fact. You go too far."

This or something like this must have been Pyotr Stepanovitch's
reflection. They were approaching Virginsky's house.

"You've represented me, no doubt, as a member from abroad, an inspector
in connection with the _Internationale?_" Stavrogin asked suddenly.

"No, not an inspector; you won't be an inspector; but you are one of
the original members from abroad, who knows the most important
secrets--that's your rôle. You are going to speak, of course?"

"What's put that idea into your head?"

"Now you are bound to speak."

Stavrogin positively stood still in the middle of the street in
surprise, not far from a street lamp. Pyotr Stepanovitch faced his
scrutiny calmly and defiantly. Stavrogin cursed and went on.

"And are you going to speak?" he suddenly asked Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"No, I am going to listen to you."

"Damn you, you really are giving me an idea!"

"What idea?" Pyotr Stepanovitch asked quickly.

"Perhaps I will speak there, but afterwards I will give you a
hiding--and a sound one too, you know."

"By the way, I told Karmazinov this morning that you said he ought to be
thrashed, and not simply as a form but to hurt, as they flog peasants."

"But I never said such a thing; ha ha!"

"No matter. _Se non è vero..._"

"Well, thanks. I am truly obliged."

"And another thing. Do you know, Karmazinov says that the essence of
our creed is the negation of honour, and that by the open advocacy of a
right to be dishonourable a Russian can be won over more easily than by
anything."

"An excellent saying! Golden words!" cried Stavrogin. "He's hit the mark
there! The right to dishonour--why, they'd all flock to us for that, not
one would stay behind! And listen, Verhovensky, you are not one of the
higher police, are you?"

"Anyone who has a question like that in his mind doesn't utter it."

"I understand, but we are by ourselves."

"No, so far I am not one of the higher police. Enough, here we are.
Compose your features, Stavrogin; I always do mine when I go in. A
gloomy expression, that's all, nothing more is wanted; it's a very
simple business."




CHAPTER VII. A MEETING

VIRGINSKY LIVED IN HIS OWN house, or rather his wife's, in Muravyin
Street. It was a wooden house of one story, and there were no lodgers in
it. On the pretext of Virginsky's-name-day party, about fifteen guests
were assembled; but the entertainment was not in the least like an
ordinary provincial name-day party. From the very beginning of their
married life the husband and wife had agreed once for all that it was
utterly stupid to invite friends to celebrate name-days, and that "there
is nothing to rejoice about in fact." In a few years they had succeeded
in completely cutting themselves off from all society. Though he was
a man of some ability, and by no means very poor, he somehow seemed
to every one an eccentric fellow who was fond of solitude, and, what's
more, "stuck up in conversation." Madame Virginsky was a midwife by
profession--and by that very fact was on the lowest rung of the social
ladder, lower even than the priest's wife in spite of her husband's
rank as an officer. But she was conspicuously lacking in the humility
befitting her position. And after her very stupid and unpardonably open
liaison on principle with Captain Lebyadkin, a notorious rogue, even the
most indulgent of our ladies turned away from her with marked contempt.
But Madame Virginsky accepted all this as though it were what she
wanted. It is remarkable that those very ladies applied to Arina
Prohorovna (that is, Madame Virginsky) when they were in an interesting
condition, rather than to any one of the other three _accoucheuses_ of
the town. She was sent for even by country families living in the
neighbourhood, so great was the belief in her knowledge, luck, and skill
in critical cases. It ended in her practising only among the wealthiest
ladies; she was greedy of money. Feeling her power to the full, she
ended by not putting herself out for anyone. Possibly on purpose,
indeed, in her practice in the best houses she used to scare nervous
patients by the most incredible and nihilistic disregard of good
manners, or by jeering at "everything holy," at the very time when
"everything holy" might have come in most useful. Our town doctor,
Rozanov--he too was an _accoucheur_--asserted most positively that on one
occasion when a patient in labour was crying out and calling on the name
of the Almighty, a free-thinking sally from Arina Prohorovna, fired off
like a pistol-shot, had so terrifying an effect on the patient that it
greatly accelerated her delivery.

But though she was a nihilist, Madame Virginsky did not, when occasion
arose, disdain social or even old-fashioned superstitions and customs
if they could be of any advantage to herself. She would never, for
instance, have stayed away from a baby's christening, and always put on
a green silk dress with a train and adorned her chignon with curls and
ringlets for such events, though at other times she positively revelled
in slovenliness. And though during the ceremony she always maintained
"the most insolent air," so that she put the clergy to confusion, yet
when it was over she invariably handed champagne to the guests (it was
for that that she came and dressed up), and it was no use trying to take
the glass without a contribution to her "porridge bowl."

The guests who assembled that evening at Virginsky's (mostly men) had a
casual and exceptional air. There was no supper nor cards. In the middle
of the large drawing-room, which was papered with extremely old blue
paper, two tables had been put together and covered with a large though
not quite clean table-cloth, and on them two samovars were boiling. The
end of the table was taken up by a huge tray with twenty-five glasses on
it and a basket with ordinary French bread cut into a number of slices,
as one sees it in genteel boarding-schools for boys or girls. The tea
was poured out by a maiden lady of thirty, Arina Prohorovna's sister,
a silent and malevolent creature, with flaxen hair and no eyebrows, who
shared her sister's progressive ideas and was an object of terror to
Virginsky himself in domestic life. There were only three ladies in the
room: the lady of the house, her eyebrowless sister, and Virginsky's
sister, a girl who had just arrived from Petersburg. Arina Prohorovna, a
good-looking and buxom woman of seven-and-twenty, rather dishevelled, in
an everyday greenish woollen dress, was sitting scanning the guests with
her bold eyes, and her look seemed in haste to say, "You see I am not
