

V

Our friend certainly had fallen into not a few bad habits, especially of
late. He had obviously and rapidly deteriorated; and it was true that
he had become slovenly. He drank more and had become more tearful and
nervous; and had grown too impressionable on the artistic side. His
face had acquired a strange facility for changing with extraordinary
quickness, from the most solemn expression, for instance, to the most
absurd, and even foolish. He could not endure solitude, and was always
craving for amusement. One had always to repeat to him some gossip, some
local anecdote, and every day a new one. If no one came to see him for
a long time he wandered disconsolately about the rooms, walked to the
window, puckering up his lips, heaved deep sighs, and almost fell to
whimpering at last. He was always full of forebodings, was afraid of
something unexpected and inevitable; he had become timorous; he began to
pay great attention to his dreams.

He spent all that day and evening in great depression, he sent for me,
was very much agitated, talked a long while, gave me a long account of
things, but all rather disconnected. Varvara Petrovna had known for a
long time that he concealed nothing from me. It seemed to me at last
that he was worried about something particular, and was perhaps unable
to form a definite idea of it himself. As a rule when we met _tête-à-tête_
and he began making long complaints to me, a bottle was almost always
brought in after a little time, and things became much more comfortable.
This time there was no wine, and he was evidently struggling all the
while against the desire to send for it.

"And why is she always so cross?" he complained every minute, like a
child. _"Tous les hommes de génie et de progrès en Russie étaient,
sont, et seront toujours des_ gamblers _et des_ drunkards _qui boivent_ in
outbreaks... and I'm not such a gambler after all, and I'm not such a
drunkard. She reproaches me for not writing anything. Strange
idea!... She asks why I lie down? She says I ought to stand, 'an example
and reproach.' _Mais, entre nous soit dit,_ what is a man to do who is
destined to stand as a 'reproach,' if not to lie down? Does she
understand that?"

And at last it became clear to me what was the chief particular trouble
which was worrying him so persistently at this time. Many times that
evening he went to the looking-glass, and stood a long while before
it. At last he turned from the looking-glass to me, and with a sort
of strange despair, said: "_Mon cher, je suis un_ broken-down man." Yes,
certainly, up to that time, up to that very day there was one thing only
of which he had always felt confident in spite of the "new views," and
of the "change in Varvara Petrovna's ideas," that was, the conviction
that still he had a fascination for her feminine heart, not simply as an
exile or a celebrated man of learning, but as a handsome man. For twenty
years this soothing and flattering opinion had been rooted in his mind,
and perhaps of all his convictions this was the hardest to part with.
Had he any presentiment that evening of the colossal ordeal which was
preparing for him in the immediate future?


VI

I will now enter upon the description of that almost forgotten incident
with which my story properly speaking begins.

At last at the very end of August the Drozdovs returned. Their arrival
made a considerable sensation in local society, and took place shortly
before their relation, our new governor's wife, made her long-expected
appearance. But of all these interesting events I will speak later.
For the present I will confine myself to saying that Praskovya Ivanovna
brought Varvara Petrovna, who was expecting her so impatiently, a most
perplexing problem: Nikolay had parted from them in July, and,
meeting Count K. on the Rhine, had set off with him and his family for
Petersburg. (N.B.--The Count's three daughters were all of marriageable
age.)

"Lizaveta is so proud and obstinate that I could get nothing out of
her," Praskovya Ivanovna said in conclusion. "But I saw for myself that
something had happened between her and Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. I don't
know the reasons, but I fancy, my dear Varvara Petrovna, that you
will have to ask your Darya Pavlovna for them. To my thinking Liza
was offended. I'm glad. I can tell you that I've brought you back your
favourite at last and handed her over to you; it's a weight off my
mind."

These venomous words were uttered with remarkable irritability. It was
evident that the "flabby" woman had prepared them and gloated beforehand
over the effect they would produce. But Varvara Petrovna was not the
woman to be disconcerted by sentimental effects and enigmas. She sternly
demanded the most precise and satisfactory explanations. Praskovya
Ivanovna immediately lowered her tone and even ended by dissolving into
tears and expressions of the warmest friendship. This irritable but
sentimental lady, like Stepan Trofimovitch, was for ever yearning for
true friendship, and her chief complaint against her daughter Lizaveta
Nikolaevna was just that "her daughter was not a friend to her."

But from all her explanations and outpourings nothing certain could be
gathered but that there actually had been some sort of quarrel between
Liza and Nikolay, but of the nature of the quarrel Praskovya Ivanovna
was obviously unable to form a definite idea. As for her imputations
against Darya Pavlovna, she not only withdrew them completely in the
end, but even particularly begged Varvara Petrovna to pay no attention
to her words, because "they had been said in irritation." In fact, it
had all been left very far from clear--suspicious, indeed. According to
her account the quarrel had arisen from Liza's "obstinate and ironical
character." "Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch is proud, too, and though he
was very much in love, yet he could not endure sarcasm, and began to be
sarcastic himself. Soon afterwards we made the acquaintance of a
young man, the nephew, I believe, of your 'Professor' and, indeed, the
surname's the same."

"The son, not the nephew," Varvara Petrovna corrected her.

Even in old days Praskovya Ivanovna had been always unable to recall
Stepan Trofimovitch's name, and had always called him the "Professor."

"Well, his son, then; so much the better. Of course, it's all the same
to me. An ordinary young man, very lively and free in his manners, but
nothing special in him. Well, then, Liza herself did wrong, she
made friends with the young man with the idea of making Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch jealous. I don't see much harm in that; it's the way of
girls, quite usual, even charming in them. Only instead of being jealous
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch made friends with the young man himself, just as
though he saw nothing and didn't care. This made Liza furious. The young
man soon went away (he was in a great hurry to get somewhere) and
Liza took to picking quarrels with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at every
opportunity. She noticed that he used sometimes to talk to Dasha; and,
well, she got in such a frantic state that even my life wasn't worth
living, my dear. The doctors have forbidden my being irritated, and I
was so sick of their lake they make such a fuss about, it simply gave me
toothache, I had such rheumatism. It's stated in print that the Lake of
Geneva does give people the toothache. It's a feature of the place. Then
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch suddenly got a letter from the countess and he
left us at once. He packed up in one day. They parted in a friendly way,
and Liza became very cheerful and frivolous, and laughed a great deal
seeing him off; only that was all put on. When he had gone she became
very thoughtful, and she gave up speaking of him altogether and wouldn't
let me mention his name. And I should advise you, dear Varvara Petrovna,
not to approach the subject with Liza, you'll only do harm. But if you
hold your tongue she'll begin to talk of it herself, and then you'll
learn more. I believe they'll come together again, if only Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch doesn't put off coming, as he promised."

"I'll write to him at once. If that's how it was, there was nothing in
the quarrel; all nonsense! And I know Darya too well. It's nonsense!"

"I'm sorry for what I said about Dashenka, I did wrong. Their
conversations were quite ordinary and they talked out loud, too. But it
all upset me so much at the time, my dear. And Liza, I saw, got on with
her again as affectionately as before...."

That very day Varvara Petrovna wrote to Nikolay, and begged him to come,
if only one month, earlier than the date he had fixed. But yet she still
felt that there was something unexplained and obscure in the matter.
She pondered over it all the evening and all night. Praskovya's opinion
seemed to her too innocent and sentimental. "Praskovya has always
been too sentimental from the old schooldays upwards," she reflected.
"Nicolas is not the man to run away from a girl's taunts. There's some
other reason for it, if there really has been a breach between them.
That officer's here though, they've brought him with them. As a relation
he lives in their house. And, as for Darya, Praskovya was in too much
haste to apologise. She must have kept something to herself, which she
wouldn't tell me."

By the morning Varvara Petrovna had matured a project for putting a stop
once for all to one misunderstanding at least; a project amazing in its
unexpectedness. What was in her heart when she conceived it? It would
be hard to decide and I will not undertake to explain beforehand all
the incongruities of which it was made up. I simply confine myself as
chronicler to recording events precisely as they happened, and it is not
my fault if they seem incredible. Yet I must once more testify that by
the morning there was not the least suspicion of Dasha left in Varvara
Petrovna's mind, though in reality there never had been any--she had
too much confidence in her. Besides, she could not admit the idea that
"Nicolas" could be attracted by her Darya. Next morning when Darya
Pavlovna was pouring out tea at the table Varvara Petrovna looked for a
long while intently at her and, perhaps for the twentieth time since the
previous day, repeated to herself: "It's all nonsense!"

All she noticed was that Dasha looked rather tired, and that she was
even quieter and more apathetic than she used to be. After their morning
tea, according to their invariable custom, they sat down to needlework.
Varvara Petrovna demanded from her a full account of her impressions
abroad, especially of nature, of the inhabitants, of the towns, the
customs, their arts and commerce--of everything she had time to observe.
She asked no questions about the Drozdovs or how she had got on with
them. Dasha, sitting beside her at the work-table helping her with the
embroidery, talked for half an hour in her even, monotonous, but rather
weak voice.

"Darya!" Varvara Petrovna interrupted suddenly, "is there nothing
special you want to tell me?"

"No, nothing," said Dasha, after a moment's thought, and she glanced at
Varvara Petrovna with her light-coloured eyes.

"Nothing on your soul, on your heart, or your conscience?"

"Nothing," Dasha repeated, quietly, but with a sort of sullen firmness.

"I knew there wasn't! Believe me, Darya, I shall never doubt you. Now
sit still and listen. In front of me, on that chair. I want to see the
whole of you. That's right. Listen, do you want to be married?"

Dasha responded with a long, inquiring, but not greatly astonished look.

"Stay, hold your tongue. In the first place there is a very great
difference in age, but of course you know better than anyone what
nonsense that is. You're a sensible girl, and there must be no mistakes
in your life. Besides, he's still a handsome man... In short, Stepan
Trofimovitch, for whom you have always had such a respect. Well?"

Dasha looked at her still more inquiringly, and this time not simply
with surprise; she blushed perceptibly.

"Stay, hold your tongue, don't be in a hurry! Though you will have money
under my will, yet when I die, what will become of you, even if you have
money? You'll be deceived and robbed of your money, you'll be lost in
fact. But married to him you're the wife of a distinguished man. Look at
him on the other hand. Though I've provided for him, if I die what will
become of him? But I could trust him to you. Stay, I've not finished.
He's frivolous, shilly-shally, cruel, egoistic, he has low habits. But
mind you think highly of him, in the first place because there are many
worse. I don't want to get you off my hands by marrying you to a rascal,
you don't imagine anything of that sort, do you? And, above all, because
I ask you, you'll think highly of him,"--

She broke off suddenly and irritably. "Do you hear? Why won't you say
something?"

Dasha still listened and did not speak.

"Stay, wait a little. He's an old woman, but you know, that's all the
better for you. Besides, he's a pathetic old woman. He doesn't deserve
to be loved by a woman at all, but he deserves to be loved for his
helplessness, and you must love him for his helplessness. You understand
me, don't you? Do you understand me?"

Dasha nodded her head affirmatively.

"I knew you would. I expected as much of you. He will love you because
he ought, he ought; he ought to adore you." Varvara Petrovna almost
shrieked with peculiar exasperation. "Besides, he will be in love with
you without any ought about it. I know him. And another thing, I shall
always be here. You may be sure I shall always be here. He will complain
of you, he'll begin to say things against you behind your back, he'll
whisper things against you to any stray person he meets, he'll be for
ever whining and whining; he'll write you letters from one room to
another, two a day, but he won't be able to get on without you all the
same, and that's the chief thing. Make him obey you. If you can't make
him you'll be a fool. He'll want to hang himself and threaten, to--don't
you believe it. It's nothing but nonsense. Don't believe it; but still
keep a sharp look-out, you never can tell, and one day he may hang
himself. It does happen with people like that. It's not through strength
of will but through weakness that people hang themselves, and so
never drive him to an extreme, that's the first rule in married life.
Remember, too, that he's a poet. Listen, Dasha, there's no greater
happiness than self-sacrifice. And besides, you'll be giving me great
satisfaction and that's the chief thing. Don't think I've been talking
nonsense. I understand what I'm saying. I'm an egoist, you be an egoist,
too. Of course I'm not forcing you. It's entirely for you to decide.
As you say, so it shall be. Well, what's the good of sitting like this.
Speak!"

"I don't mind, Varvara Petrovna, if I really must be married," said
Dasha firmly.

"Must? What are you hinting at?" Varvara Petrovna looked sternly and
intently at her.

Dasha was silent, picking at her embroidery canvas with her needle.

"Though you're a clever girl, you're talking nonsense; though it is true
that I have certainly set my heart on marrying you, yet it's not because
it's necessary, but simply because the idea has occurred to me, and only
to Stepan Trofimovitch. If it had not been for Stepan Trofimovitch, I
should not have thought of marrying you yet, though you are twenty....
Well?"

"I'll do as you wish, Varvara Petrovna."

"Then you consent! Stay, be quiet. Why are you in such a hurry? I
haven't finished. In my will I've left you fifteen thousand roubles.
I'll give you that at once, on your wedding-day. You will give eight
thousand of it to him; that is, not to him but to me. He has a debt of
eight thousand. I'll pay it, but he must know that it is done with your
money. You'll have seven thousand left in your hands. Never let him
touch a farthing of it. Don't pay his debts ever. If once you pay them,
you'll never be free of them. Besides, I shall always be here. You
shall have twelve hundred roubles a year from me, with extras, fifteen
hundred, besides board and lodging, which shall be at my expense, just
as he has it now. Only you must set up your own servants. Your yearly
allowance shall be paid to you all at once straight into your hands. But
be kind, and sometimes give him something, and let his friends come to
see him once a week, but if they come more often, turn them out. But
I shall be here, too. And if I die, your pension will go on till his
death, do you hear, till his death, for it's his pension, not yours.
And besides the seven thousand you'll have now, which you ought to keep
untouched if you're not foolish, I'll leave you another eight thousand
in my will. And you'll get nothing more than that from me, it's right
that you should know it. Come, you consent, eh? Will you say something
at last?"

"I have told you already, Varvara Petrovna."

"Remember that you're free to decide. As you like, so it shall be."

"Then, may I ask, Varvara Petrovna, has Stepan Trofimovitch said
anything yet?"

"No, he hasn't said anything, he doesn't know... but he will speak
directly."

She jumped up at once and threw on a black shawl. Dasha flushed a little
again, and watched her with questioning eyes. Varvara Petrovna turned
suddenly to her with a face flaming with anger.

"You're a fool!" She swooped down on her like a hawk. "An ungrateful
fool! What's in your mind? Can you imagine that I'd compromise you, in
any way, in the smallest degree. Why, he shall crawl on his knees to
ask you, he must be dying of happiness, that's how it shall be arranged.
Why, you know that I'd never let you suffer. Or do you suppose he'll
take you for the sake of that eight thousand, and that I'm hurrying off
to sell you? You're a fool, a fool! You're all ungrateful fools. Give me
my umbrella!"

And she flew off to walk by the wet brick pavements and the wooden
planks to Stepan Trofimovitch's.


VII

It was true that she would never have let Dasha suffer; on the contrary,
she considered now that she was acting as her benefactress. The most
generous and legitimate indignation was glowing in her soul, when, as
she put on her shawl, she caught fixed upon her the embarrassed and
mistrustful eyes of her protégée. She had genuinely loved the girl from
her childhood upwards. Praskovya Ivanovna had with justice called Darya
Pavlovna her favourite. Long ago Varvara Petrovna had made up her mind
once for all that "Darya's disposition was not like her brother's" (not,
that is, like Ivan Shatov's), that she was quiet and gentle, and capable
of great self-sacrifice; that she was distinguished by a power of
devotion, unusual modesty, rare reasonableness, and, above all, by
gratitude. Till that time Dasha had, to all appearances, completely
justified her expectations.

"In that life there will be no mistakes," said Varvara Petrovna when the
girl was only twelve years old, and as it was characteristic of her to
attach herself doggedly and passionately to any dream that fascinated
her, any new design, any idea that struck her as noble, she made up her
mind at once to educate Dasha as though she were her own daughter. She
at once set aside a sum of money for her, and sent for a governess, Miss
Criggs, who lived with them until the girl was sixteen, but she was
for some reason suddenly dismissed. Teachers came for her from the High
School, among them a real Frenchman, who taught Dasha French. He, too,
was suddenly dismissed, almost turned out of the house. A poor lady, a
widow of good family, taught her to play the piano. Yet her chief tutor
was Stepan Trofimovitch.

In reality he first discovered Dasha. He began teaching the quiet child
even before Varvara Petrovna had begun to think about her. I repeat
again, it was wonderful how children took to him. Lizaveta Nikolaevna
Tushin had been taught by him from the age of eight till eleven (Stepan
Trofimovitch took no fees, of course, for his lessons, and would not on
any account have taken payment from the Drozdovs). But he fell in love
with the charming child and used to tell her poems of a sort about the
creation of the world, about the earth, and the history of humanity.
His lectures about the primitive peoples and primitive man were more
interesting than the Arabian Nights. Liza, who was ecstatic over these
stories, used to mimic Stepan Trofimovitch very funnily at home. He
heard of this and once peeped in on her unawares. Liza, overcome
with confusion, flung herself into his arms and shed tears; Stepan
Trofimovitch wept too with delight. But Liza soon after went away, and
only Dasha was left. When Dasha began to have other teachers, Stepan
Trofimovitch gave up his lessons with her, and by degrees left off
noticing her. Things went on like this for a long time. Once when she
was seventeen he was struck by her prettiness. It happened at Varvara
Petrovna's table. He began to talk to the young girl, was much pleased
with her answers, and ended by offering to give her a serious and
comprehensive course of lessons on the history of Russian literature.
Varvara Petrovna approved, and thanked him for his excellent idea,
and Dasha was delighted. Stepan Trofimovitch proceeded to make special
preparations for the lectures, and at last they began. They began
with the most ancient period. The first lecture went off enchantingly.
Varvara Petrovna was present. When Stepan Trofimovitch had finished, and
as he was going informed his pupil that the next time he would deal with
"The Story of the Expedition of Igor," Varvara Petrovna suddenly got up
and announced that there would be no more lessons. Stepan Trofimovitch
winced, but said nothing, and Dasha flushed crimson. It put a stop to
the scheme, however. This had happened just three years before Varvara
Petrovna's unexpected fancy.

Poor Stepan Trofimovitch was sitting alone free from all misgivings.
Plunged in mournful reveries he had for some time been looking out of
the window to see whether any of his friends were coming. But nobody
would come. It was drizzling. It was turning cold, he would have to have
the stove heated. He sighed. Suddenly a terrible apparition flashed upon
his eyes:

Varvara Petrovna in such weather and at such an unexpected hour to see
him! And on foot! He was so astounded that he forgot to put on his
coat, and received her as he was, in his everlasting pink-wadded
dressing-jacket.

_"Ma bonne amie!"_ he cried faintly, to greet her. "You're alone; I'm
glad; I can't endure your friends. How you do smoke! Heavens, what an
atmosphere! You haven't finished your morning tea and it's nearly twelve
o'clock. It's your idea of bliss--disorder! You take pleasure in dirt.
What's that torn paper on the floor? Nastasya, Nastasya! What is
your Nastasya about? Open the window, the casement, the doors, fling
everything wide open. And we'll go into the drawing-room. I've come to
you on a matter of importance. And you sweep up, my good woman, for once
in your life."

"They make such a muck!" Nastasya whined in a voice of plaintive
exasperation.

"Well, you must sweep, sweep it up fifteen times a day! You've a
wretched drawing-room" (when they had gone into the drawing-room). "Shut
the door properly. She'll be listening. You must have it repapered.
Didn't I send a paperhanger to you with patterns? Why didn't you choose
one? Sit down, and listen. Do sit down, I beg you. Where are you off to?
Where are you off to? Where are you off to?

"I'll be back directly," Stepan Trofimovitch cried from the next room.
"Here I am again."

"Ah,--you've changed your coat." She scanned him mockingly. (He had
flung his coat on over the dressing-jacket.) "Well, certainly that's
more suited to our subject. Do sit down, I entreat you."

She told him everything at once, abruptly and impressively. She hinted at
the eight thousand of which he stood in such terrible need. She told him
in detail of the dowry. Stepan Trofimovitch sat trembling, opening
his eyes wider and wider. He heard it all, but he could not realise it
clearly. He tried to speak, but his voice kept breaking. All he knew
was that everything would be as she said, that to protest and refuse to
agree would be useless, and that he was a married man irrevocably.

_"Mais, ma bonne amie!_...for the third time, and at my age...and to
such a child." He brought out at last, _"Mais, c'est une enfant!"_

"A child who is twenty years old, thank God. Please don't roll your
eyes, I entreat you, you're not on the stage. You're very clever and
learned, but you know nothing at all about life. You will always want a
nurse to look after you. I shall die, and what will become of you?
She will be a good nurse to you; she's a modest girl, strong-willed,
reasonable; besides, I shall be here too, I shan't die directly. She's
fond of home, she's an angel of gentleness. This happy thought came to
me in Switzerland. Do you understand if I tell you myself that she is
an angel of gentleness!" she screamed with sudden fury. "Your house is
dirty, she will bring in order, cleanliness. Everything will shine like
a mirror. Good gracious, do you expect me to go on my knees to you with
such a treasure, to enumerate all the advantages, to court you! Why, you
ought to be on your knees.... Oh, you shallow, shallow, faint-hearted
man!"

"But... I'm an old man!"

"What do your fifty-three years matter! Fifty is the middle of life,
not the end of it. You are a handsome man and you know it yourself. You
know, too, what a respect she has for you. If I die, what will become of
her? But married to you she'll be at peace, and I shall be at peace. You
have renown, a name, a loving heart. You receive a pension which I look
upon as an obligation. You will save her perhaps, you will save her! In
any case you will be doing her an honour. You will form her for life,
you will develop her heart, you will direct her ideas. How many people
come to grief nowadays because their ideas are wrongly directed. By that
time your book will be ready, and you will at once set people talking
about you again."

"I am, in fact," he muttered, at once flattered by Varvara Petrovna's
adroit insinuations. "I was just preparing to sit down to my 'Tales from
Spanish History.'"

"Well, there you are. It's just come right."

"But... she? Have you spoken to her?"

"Don't worry about her. And there's no need for you to be inquisitive.
Of course, you must ask her yourself, entreat her to do you the honour,
you understand? But don't be uneasy. I shall be here. Besides, you love
her."

Stepan Trofimovitch felt giddy. The walls were going round. There was
one terrible idea underlying this to which he could not reconcile
himself.

_"Excellente amie,"_ his voice quivered suddenly. "I could never have
conceived that you would make up your mind to give me in marriage to
another... woman."

"You're not a girl, Stepan Trofimovitch. Only girls are given in
marriage. You are taking a wife," Varvara Petrovna hissed malignantly.

_"Oui, j'ai pris un mot pour un autre. Mais c'est égal."_ He gazed at her
with a hopeless air.

"I see that _c'est égal_," she muttered contemptuously through her teeth.
"Good heavens! Why he's going to faint. Nastasya, Nastasya, water!"

But water was not needed. He came to himself. Varvara Petrovna took up
her umbrella.

"I see it's no use talking to you now...."

_"Oui, oui, je suis incapable."_

"But by to-morrow you'll have rested and thought it over. Stay at home.
If anything happens let me know, even if it's at night. Don't write
letters, I shan't read them. To-morrow I'll come again at this time
alone, for a final answer, and I trust it will be satisfactory. Try to
have nobody here and no untidiness, for the place isn't fit to be seen.
Nastasya, Nastasya!"

The next day, of course, he consented, and, indeed, he could do nothing
else. There was one circumstance...


VIII

Stepan Trofimovitch's estate, as we used to call it (which consisted
of fifty souls, reckoning in the old fashion, and bordered on
Skvoreshniki), was not really his at all, but his first wife's, and
so belonged now to his son Pyotr Stepanovitch Verhovensky. Stepan
Trofimovitch was simply his trustee, and so, when the nestling was
full-fledged, he had given his father a formal authorisation to manage
the estate. This transaction was a profitable one for the young man. He
received as much as a thousand roubles a year by way of revenue from the
estate, though under the new regime it could not have yielded more than
five hundred, and possibly not that. God knows how such an arrangement
had arisen. The whole sum, however, was sent the young man by Varvara
Petrovna, and Stepan Trofimovitch had nothing to do with a single rouble
of it. On the other hand, the whole revenue from the land remained in
his pocket, and he had, besides, completely ruined the estate, letting
it to a mercenary rogue, and without the knowledge of Varvara Petrovna
selling the timber which gave the estate its chief value. He had some
time before sold the woods bit by bit. It was worth at least
eight thousand, yet he had only received five thousand for it. But
he sometimes lost too much at the club, and was afraid to ask Varvara
Petrovna for the money. She clenched her teeth when she heard at last of
everything. And now, all at once, his son announced that he was
coming himself to sell his property for what he could get for it, and
commissioned his father to take steps promptly to arrange the sale. It
was clear that Stepan Trofimovitch, being a generous and disinterested
man, felt ashamed of his treatment of _ce cher enfant_ (whom he had seen
for the last time nine years before as a student in Petersburg). The
estate might originally have been worth thirteen or fourteen thousand.
Now it was doubtful whether anyone would give five for it. No doubt
Stepan Trofimovitch was fully entitled by the terms of the trust to sell
the wood, and taking into account the incredibly large yearly revenue of
a thousand roubles which had been sent punctually for so many years,
he could have put up a good defence of his management. But Stepan
Trofimovitch was a generous man of exalted impulses. A wonderfully fine
inspiration occurred to his mind: when Petrusha returned, to lay on the
table before him the maximum price of fifteen thousand roubles without
a hint at the sums that had been sent him hitherto, and warmly and with
tears to press _ce cher fils_ to his heart, and so to make an end of all
accounts between them. He began cautiously and indirectly unfolding
this picture before Varvara Petrovna. He hinted that this would add a
peculiarly noble note to their friendship... to their "idea." This
would set the parents of the last generation--and people of the last
generation generally--in such a disinterested and magnanimous light in
comparison with the new frivolous and socialistic younger generation. He
said a great deal more, but Varvara Petrovna was obstinately silent. At
last she informed him airily that she was prepared to buy their estate,
and to pay for it the maximum price, that is, six or seven thousand
(though four would have been a fair price for it). Of the remaining
eight thousand which had vanished with the woods she said not a word.

This conversation took place a month before the match was proposed to
him. Stepan Trofimovitch was overwhelmed, and began to ponder. There
might in the past have been a hope that his son would not come,
after all--an outsider, that is to say, might have hoped so. Stepan
Trofimovitch as a father would have indignantly rejected the
insinuation that he could entertain such a hope. Anyway queer rumours
had hitherto been reaching us about Petrusha. To begin with, on
completing his studies at the university six years before, he had hung
about in Petersburg without getting work. Suddenly we got the news that
he had taken part in issuing some anonymous manifesto and that he
was implicated in the affair. Then he suddenly turned up abroad in
Switzerland at Geneva--he had escaped, very likely.

"It's surprising to me," Stepan Trofimovitch commented, greatly
disconcerted. "Petrusha, _c'est une si pauvre tête!_ He's good,
noble-hearted, very sensitive, and I was so delighted with him in
Petersburg, comparing him with the young people of to-day. But _c'est un
pauvre sire, tout de même_.... And you know it all comes from that
same half-bakedness, that sentimentality. They are fascinated, not by
realism, but by the emotional ideal side of socialism, by the religious
note in it, so to say, by the poetry of it... second-hand, of course.
And for me, for me, think what it means! I have so many enemies here and
more still _there_, they'll put it down to the father's influence. Good
God! Petrusha a revolutionist! What times we live in!"

Very soon, however, Petrusha sent his exact address from Switzerland for
money to be sent him as usual; so he could not be exactly an exile.
And now, after four years abroad, he was suddenly making his appearance
again in his own country, and announced that he would arrive shortly,
so there could be no charge against him. What was more, some one seemed
to be interested in him and protecting him. He wrote now from the south
of Russia, where he was busily engaged in some private but important
business. All this was capital, but where was his father to get that
other seven or eight thousand, to make up a suitable price for the
estate? And what if there should be an outcry, and instead of that
imposing picture it should come to a lawsuit? Something told Stepan
Trofimovitch that the sensitive Petrusha would not relinquish anything
that was to his interest. "Why is it--as I've noticed," Stepan
Trofimovitch whispered to me once, "why is it that all these desperate
socialists and communists are at the same time such incredible
skinflints, so avaricious, so keen over property, and, in fact, the
more socialistic, the more extreme they are, the keener they are over
property... why is it? Can that, too, come from sentimentalism?" I
don't know whether there is any truth in this observation of Stepan
Trofimovitch's. I only know that Petrusha had somehow got wind of the
sale of the woods and the rest of it, and that Stepan Trofimovitch was
aware of the fact. I happened, too, to read some of Petrusha's letters
to his father. He wrote extremely rarely, once a year, or even less
often. Only recently, to inform him of his approaching visit, he had
sent two letters, one almost immediately after the other. All his
letters were short, dry, consisting only of instructions, and as the
father and son had, since their meeting in Petersburg, adopted the
fashionable "thou" and "thee," Petrusha's letters had a striking
resemblance to the missives that used to be sent by landowners of the
old school from the town to their serfs whom they had left in charge of
their estates. And now suddenly this eight thousand which would solve
the difficulty would be wafted to him by Varvara Petrovna's proposition.
And at the same time she made him distinctly feel that it never could
be wafted to him from anywhere else. Of course Stepan Trofimovitch
consented.

He sent for me directly she had gone and shut himself up for the whole
day, admitting no one else. He cried, of course, talked well and talked
a great deal, contradicted himself continually, made a casual pun, and
was much pleased with it. Then he had a slight attack of his "summer
cholera"--everything in fact followed the usual course. Then he brought
out the portrait of his German bride, now twenty years deceased, and
began plaintively appealing to her: "Will you forgive me?" In fact he
seemed somehow distracted. Our grief led us to get a little drunk. He
soon fell into a sweet sleep, however. Next morning he tied his cravat
in masterly fashion, dressed with care, and went frequently to look at
himself in the glass. He sprinkled his handkerchief with scent, only a
slight dash of it, however, and as soon as he saw Varvara Petrovna out
of the window he hurriedly took another handkerchief and hid the scented
one under the pillow.

"Excellent!" Varvara Petrovna approved, on receiving his consent. "In
the first place you show a fine decision, and secondly you've listened
to the voice of reason, to which you generally pay so little heed in
your private affairs. There's no need of haste, however," she added,
scanning the knot of his white tie, "for the present say nothing, and I
will say nothing. It will soon be your birthday; I will come to see you
with her. Give us tea in the evening, and please without wine or other
refreshments, but I'll arrange it all myself. Invite your friends, but
we'll make the list together. You can talk to her the day before, if
necessary. And at your party we won't exactly announce it, or make an
engagement of any sort, but only hint at it, and let people know without
any sort of ceremony. And then the wedding a fortnight later, as far
as possible without any fuss.... You two might even go away for a time
after the wedding, to Moscow, for instance. I'll go with you, too,
perhaps... The chief thing is, keep quiet till then."

Stepan Trofimovitch was surprised. He tried to falter that he could
not do like that, that he must talk it over with his bride. But Varvara
Petrovna flew at him in exasperation.

"What for? In the first place it may perhaps come to nothing."

"Come to nothing!" muttered the bridegroom, utterly dumbfoundered.

"Yes. I'll see.... But everything shall be as I've told you, and don't
be uneasy. I'll prepare her myself. There's really no need for you.
Everything necessary shall be said and done, and there's no need for you
to meddle. Why should you? In what character? Don't come and don't write
letters. And not a sight or sound of you, I beg. I will be silent too."

She absolutely refused to explain herself, and went away, obviously
upset. Stepan Trofimovitch's excessive readiness evidently impressed
her. Alas! he was utterly unable to grasp his position, and the question
had not yet presented itself to him from certain other points of view.
On the contrary a new note was apparent in him, a sort of conquering and
jaunty air. He swaggered.

"I do like that!" he exclaimed, standing before me, and flinging wide
his arms. "Did you hear? She wants to drive me to refusing at last. Why,
I may lose patience, too, and... refuse! 'Sit still, there's no need
for you to go to her.' But after all, why should I be married? Simply
because she's taken an absurd fancy into her heart. But I'm a serious
man, and I can refuse to submit to the idle whims of a giddy-woman! I
have duties to my son and...and to myself! I'm making a sacrifice. Does
she realise that? I have agreed, perhaps, because I am weary of life
and nothing matters to me. But she may exasperate me, and then it will
matter. I shall resent it and refuse. _Et enfin, le ridicule_...what will
they say at the club? What will... what will... Laputin say? 'Perhaps
nothing will come of it'--what a thing to say! That beats everything.
That's really... what is one to say to that?... _Je suis un forçat, un
Badinguet, un_ man pushed to the wall...."

And at the same time a sort of capricious complacency, something
frivolous and playful, could be seen in the midst of all these plaintive
exclamations. In the evening we drank too much again.




CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS


ABOUT A WEEK had passed, and the position had begun to grow more
complicated.

I may mention in passing that I suffered a great deal during that
unhappy week, as I scarcely left the side of my affianced friend, in the
capacity of his most intimate confidant. What weighed upon him most
was the feeling of shame, though we saw no one all that week, and sat
indoors alone. But he was even ashamed before me, and so much so that
the more he confided to me the more vexed he was with me for it. He was
so morbidly apprehensive that he expected that every one knew about it
already, the whole town, and was afraid to show himself, not only at the
club, but even in his circle of friends. He positively would not go out
to take his constitutional till well after dusk, when it was quite dark.

A week passed and he still did not know whether he were betrothed or
not, and could not find out for a fact, however much he tried. He had
not yet seen his future bride, and did not know whether she was to be
his bride or not; did not, in fact, know whether there was anything
serious in it at all. Varvara Petrovna, for some reason, resolutely
refused to admit him to her presence. In answer to one of his first
letters to her (and he wrote a great number of them) she begged him
plainly to spare her all communications with him for a time, because
she was very busy, and having a great deal of the utmost importance to
communicate to him she was waiting for a more free moment to do so, and
that she would let him know _in time_ when he could come to see her. She
declared she would send back his letters unopened, as they were "simple
self-indulgence." I read that letter myself--he showed it me.

Yet all this harshness and indefiniteness were nothing compared with
his chief anxiety. That anxiety tormented him to the utmost and without
ceasing. He grew thin and dispirited through it. It was something of
which he was more ashamed than of anything else, and of which he would
not on any account speak, even to me; on the contrary, he lied on
occasion, and shuffled before me like a little boy; and at the same time
he sent for me himself every day, could not stay two hours without me,
needing me as much as air or water.

Such conduct rather wounded my vanity. I need hardly say that I had
long ago privately guessed this great secret of his, and saw through it
completely. It was my firmest conviction at the time that the revelation
of this secret, this chief anxiety of Stepan Trofimovitch's would not
have redounded to his credit, and, therefore, as I was still young, I
was rather indignant at the coarseness of his feelings and the ugliness
of some of his suspicions. In my warmth--and, I must confess, in my
weariness of being his confidant--I perhaps blamed him too much. I was
so cruel as to try and force him to confess it all to me himself, though
I did recognise that it might be difficult to confess some things. He,
too, saw through me; that is, he clearly perceived that I saw through
him, and that I was angry with him indeed, and he was angry with me
too for being angry with him and seeing through him. My irritation was
perhaps petty and stupid; but the unrelieved solitude of two friends
together is sometimes extremely prejudicial to true friendship. From a
certain point of view he had a very true understanding of some aspects
of his position, and defined it, indeed, very subtly on those points
about which he did not think it necessary to be secret.

"Oh, how different she was then!" he would sometimes say to me about
Varvara Petrovna. "How different she was in the old days when we used to
talk together.... Do you know that she could talk in those days! Can
you believe that she had ideas in those days, original ideas! Now,
everything has changed! She says all that's only old-fashioned twaddle.
She despises the past.... Now she's like some shopman or cashier, she
has grown hard-hearted, and she's always cross...."

"Why is she cross now if you are carrying out her orders?" I answered.

He looked at me subtly.

"_Cher ami_; if I had not agreed she would have been dreadfully angry,
dread-ful-ly! But yet less than now that I have consented."

He was pleased with this saying of his, and we emptied a bottle between
us that evening. But that was only for a moment, next day he was worse
and more ill-humoured than ever.

But what I was most vexed with him for was that he could not bring
himself to call on the Drozdovs, as he should have done on their
arrival, to renew the acquaintance of which, so we heard they were
themselves desirous, since they kept asking about him. It was a source
of daily distress to him. He talked of Lizaveta Nikolaevna with an
ecstasy which I was at a loss to understand. No doubt he remembered in
her the child whom he had once loved. But besides that, he imagined for
some unknown reason that he would at once find in her company a solace
for his present misery, and even the solution of his more serious
doubts. He expected to meet in Lizaveta Nikolaevna an extraordinary
being. And yet he did not go to see her though he meant to do so every
day. The worst of it was that I was desperately anxious to be presented
to her and to make her acquaintance, and I could look to no one but
Stepan Trofimovitch to effect this. I was frequently meeting her, in the
street of course, when she was out riding, wearing a riding-habit and
mounted on a fine horse, and accompanied by her cousin, so-called, a
handsome officer, the nephew of the late General Drozdov--and these
meetings made an extraordinary impression on me at the time. My
infatuation lasted only a moment, and I very soon afterwards recognised
the impossibility of my dreams myself--but though it was a fleeting
impression it was a very real one, and so it may well be imagined
how indignant I was at the time with my poor friend for keeping so
obstinately secluded.

All the members of our circle had been officially informed from the
beginning that Stepan Trofimovitch would see nobody for a time, and
begged them to leave him quite alone. He insisted on sending round a
circular notice to this effect, though I tried to dissuade him. I
went round to every one at his request and told everybody that Varvara
Petrovna had given "our old man" (as we all used to call Stepan
Trofimovitch among ourselves) a special job, to arrange in order some
correspondence lasting over many years; that he had shut himself up to
do it and I was helping him. Liputin was the only one I did not have
time to visit, and I kept putting it off--to tell the real truth I was
afraid to go to him. I knew beforehand that he would not believe one
word of my story, that he would certainly imagine that there was some
secret at the bottom of it, which they were trying to hide from him
alone, and as soon as I left him he would set to work to make inquiries
and gossip all over the town. While I was picturing all this to myself
I happened to run across him in the street. It turned out that he had
heard all about it from our friends, whom I had only just informed. But,
strange to say, instead of being inquisitive and asking questions about
Stepan Trofimovitch, he interrupted me, when I began apologising for not
having come to him before, and at once passed to other subjects. It is
true that he had a great deal stored up to tell me. He was in a state
of great excitement, and was delighted to have got hold of me for a
listener. He began talking of the news of the town, of the arrival
of the governor's wife, "with new topics of conversation," of an
opposition party already formed in the club, of how they were all in a
hubbub over the new ideas, and how charmingly this suited him, and so
on. He talked for a quarter of an hour and so amusingly that I could not
tear myself away. Though I could not endure him, yet I must admit he had
the gift of making one listen to him, especially when he was very angry
at something. This man was, in my opinion, a regular spy from his very
nature. At every moment he knew the very latest gossip and all the
trifling incidents of our town, especially the unpleasant ones, and it
was surprising to me how he took things to heart that were sometimes
absolutely no concern of his. It always seemed to me that the leading
feature of his character was envy. When I told Stepan Trofimovitch the
same evening of my meeting Liputin that morning and our conversation,
the latter to my amazement became greatly agitated, and asked me the
wild question: "Does Liputin know or not?"

I began trying to prove that there was no possibility of his finding it
out so soon, and that there was nobody from whom he could hear it. But
Stepan Trofimovitch was not to be shaken. "Well, you may believe it or
not," he concluded unexpectedly at last, "but I'm convinced that he not
only knows every detail of 'our' position, but that he knows something
else besides, something neither you nor I know yet, and perhaps never
shall, or shall only know when it's too late, when there's no turning
back!..."

I said nothing, but these words suggested a great deal. For five whole
days after that we did not say one word about Liputin; it was clear to
me that Stepan Trofimovitch greatly regretted having let his tongue run
away with him, and having revealed such suspicions before me.


II

One morning, on the seventh or eighth day after Stepan Trofimovitch had
consented to become "engaged," about eleven o'clock, when I was hurrying
as usual to my afflicted friend, I had an adventure on the way.

I met Karmazinov, "the great writer," as Liputin called him. I had read
Karmazinov from a child. His novels and tales were well known to the
past and even to the present generation. I revelled in them; they were
the great enjoyment of my childhood and youth. Afterwards I grew rather
less enthusiastic over his work. I did not care so much for the novels
with a purpose which he had been writing of late as for his first,
early works, which were so full of spontaneous poetry, and his latest
publications I had not liked at all. Speaking generally, if I may
venture to express my opinion on so delicate a subject, all these
talented gentlemen of the middling sort who are sometimes in their
lifetime accepted almost as geniuses, pass out of memory quite suddenly
and without a trace when they die, and what's more, it often happens
that even during their lifetime, as soon as a new generation grows up
and takes the place of the one in which they have flourished, they are
forgotten and neglected by every one in an incredibly short time. This
somehow happens among us quite suddenly, like the shifting of the scenes
on the stage. Oh, it's not at all the same as with Pushkin, Gogol,
Molière, Voltaire, all those great men who really had a new original
word to say! It's true, too, that these talented gentlemen of the
middling sort in the decline of their venerable years usually write
themselves out in the most pitiful way, though they don't observe the
fact themselves. It happens not infrequently that a writer who has been
for a long time credited with extraordinary profundity and expected
to exercise a great and serious influence on the progress of society,
betrays in the end such poverty, such insipidity in his fundamental
ideas that no one regrets that he succeeded in writing himself out so
soon. But the old grey-beards don't notice this, and are angry. Their
vanity sometimes, especially towards the end of their career, reaches
proportions that may well provoke wonder. God knows what they begin
to take themselves for--for gods at least! People used to say about
Karmazinov that his connections with aristocratic society and powerful
personages were dearer to him than his own soul, people used to say that
on meeting you he would be cordial, that he would fascinate and enchant
you with his open-heartedness, especially if you were of use to him in
some way, and if you came to him with some preliminary recommendation.
But that before any stray prince, any stray countess, anyone that he
was afraid of, he would regard it as his sacred duty to forget your
existence with the most insulting carelessness, like a chip of wood,
like a fly, before you had even time to get out of his sight; he
seriously considered this the best and most aristocratic style. In spite
of the best of breeding and perfect knowledge of good manners he is,
they say, vain to such an hysterical pitch that he cannot conceal his
irritability as an author even in those circles of society where little
interest is taken in literature. If anyone were to surprise him by being
indifferent, he would be morbidly chagrined, and try to revenge himself.

A year before, I had read an article of his in a review, written with
an immense affectation of naïve poetry, and psychology too. He described
the wreck of some steamer on the English coast, of which he had been
the witness, and how he had seen the drowning people saved, and the
dead bodies brought ashore. All this rather long and verbose article
was written solely with the object of self-display. One seemed to read
between the lines: "Concentrate yourselves on me. Behold what I was like
at those moments. What are the sea, the storm, the rocks, the splinters
of wrecked ships to you? I have described all that sufficiently to you
with my mighty pen. Why look at that drowned woman with the dead child
in her dead arms? Look rather at me, see how I was unable to bear that
sight and turned away from it. Here I stood with my back to it; here
I was horrified and could not bring myself to look; I blinked my
eyes--isn't that interesting?" When I told Stepan Trofimovitch my
opinion of Karmazinov's article he quite agreed with me.

When rumours had reached us of late that Karmazinov was coming to the
neighbourhood I was, of course, very eager to see him, and, if possible,
to make his acquaintance. I knew that this might be done through Stepan
Trofimovitch, they had once been friends. And now I suddenly met him at
the cross-roads. I knew him at once. He had been pointed out to me two
or three days before when he drove past with the governor's wife. He
was a short, stiff-looking old man, though not over fifty-five, with a
rather red little face, with thick grey locks of hair clustering under
his chimney-pot hat, and curling round his clean little pink ears.
His clean little face was not altogether handsome with its thin, long,
crafty-looking lips, with its rather fleshy nose, and its sharp, shrewd
little eyes. He was dressed somewhat shabbily in a sort of cape such as
would be worn in Switzerland or North Italy at that time of year. But,
at any rate, all the minor details of his costume, the little studs,
and collar, the buttons, the tortoise-shell lorgnette on a narrow black
ribbon, the signet-ring, were all such as are worn by persons of the
most irreproachable good form. I am certain that in summer he must have
worn light prunella shoes with mother-of-pearl buttons at the side.
When we met he was standing still at the turning and looking about him,
attentively. Noticing that I was looking at him with interest, he asked
me in a sugary, though rather shrill voice:

"Allow me to ask, which is my nearest way to Bykovy Street?"

"To Bykovy Street? Oh, that's here, close by," I cried in great
excitement. "Straight on along this street and the second turning to the
left."

"Very much obliged to you."

A curse on that minute! I fancy I was shy, and looked cringing. He
instantly noticed all that, and of course realised it all at once; that
is, realised that I knew who he was, that I had read him and revered
him from a child, and that I was shy and looked at him cringingly. He
smiled, nodded again, and walked on as I had directed him. I don't know
why I turned back to follow him; I don't know why I ran for ten paces
beside him. He suddenly stood still again.

"And could you tell me where is the nearest cab-stand?" he shouted out
to me again.

It was a horrid shout! A horrid voice!

"A cab-stand? The nearest cab-stand is... by the Cathedral; there are
always cabs standing there," and I almost turned to run for a cab for
him. I almost believe that that was what he expected me to do. Of
course I checked myself at once, and stood still, but he had noticed
my movement and was still watching me with the same horrid smile. Then
something happened which I shall never forget.

He suddenly dropped a tiny bag, which he was holding in his left
hand; though indeed it was not a bag, but rather a little box, or more
probably some part of a pocket-book, or to be more accurate a little
reticule, rather like an old-fashioned lady's reticule, though I really
don't know what it was. I only know that I flew to pick it up.

I am convinced that I did not really pick it up, but my first motion
was unmistakable. I could not conceal it, and, like a fool, I turned
crimson. The cunning fellow at once got all that could be got out of the
circumstance.

"Don't trouble, I'll pick it up," he pronounced charmingly; that is,
when he was quite sure that I was not going to pick up the reticule, he
picked it up as though forestalling me, nodded once more, and went his
way, leaving me to look like a fool. It was as good as though I had
picked it up myself. For five minutes I considered myself utterly
disgraced for ever, but as I reached Stepan Trofimovitch's house I
suddenly burst out laughing; the meeting struck me as so amusing that I
immediately resolved to entertain Stepan Trofimovitch with an account of
it, and even to act the whole scene to him.


III

But this time to my surprise I found an extraordinary change in him. He
