been quite enough to persuade them that they stand alone in the van of
enlightenment and that no one has such humanitarian feelings as they.
Others have but to read an idea of somebody else's, and they can
immediately assimilate it and believe that it was a child of their own
brain. The "impudence of ignorance," if I may use the expression, is
developed to a wonderful extent in such cases;--unlikely as it appears,
it is met with at every turn.

This confidence of a stupid man in his own talents has been wonderfully
depicted by Gogol in the amazing character of Pirogoff. Pirogoff has
not the slightest doubt of his own genius,--nay, of his _superiority_ of
genius,--so certain is he of it that he never questions it. How
many Pirogoffs have there not been among our writers--scholars,
propagandists? I say "have been," but indeed there are plenty of them at
this very day.

Our friend, Gania, belonged to the other class--to the "much cleverer"
persons, though he was from head to foot permeated and saturated with
the longing to be original. This class, as I have said above, is far
less happy. For the "clever commonplace" person, though he may possibly
imagine himself a man of genius and originality, none the less has
within his heart the deathless worm of suspicion and doubt; and this
doubt sometimes brings a clever man to despair. (As a rule, however,
nothing tragic happens;--his liver becomes a little damaged in the
course of time, nothing more serious. Such men do not give up their
aspirations after originality without a severe struggle,--and there have
been men who, though good fellows in themselves, and even benefactors
to humanity, have sunk to the level of base criminals for the sake of
originality).

Gania was a beginner, as it were, upon this road. A deep and
unchangeable consciousness of his own lack of talent, combined with a
vast longing to be able to persuade himself that he was original, had
rankled in his heart, even from childhood.

He seemed to have been born with overwrought nerves, and in his
passionate desire to excel, he was often led to the brink of some
rash step; and yet, having resolved upon such a step, when the moment
arrived, he invariably proved too sensible to take it. He was ready,
in the same way, to do a base action in order to obtain his wished-for
object; and yet, when the moment came to do it, he found that he was too
honest for any great baseness. (Not that he objected to acts of petty
meanness--he was always ready for _them_.) He looked with hate and
loathing on the poverty and downfall of his family, and treated his
mother with haughty contempt, although he knew that his whole future
depended on her character and reputation.

Aglaya had simply frightened him; yet he did not give up all thoughts of
her--though he never seriously hoped that she would condescend to him.
At the time of his "adventure" with Nastasia Philipovna he had come to
the conclusion that money was his only hope--money should do all for
him.

At the moment when he lost Aglaya, and after the scene with Nastasia, he
had felt so low in his own eyes that he actually brought the money back
to the prince. Of this returning of the money given to him by a madwoman
who had received it from a madman, he had often repented since--though
he never ceased to be proud of his action. During the short time that
Muishkin remained in Petersburg Gania had had time to come to hate him
for his sympathy, though the prince told him that it was "not everyone
who would have acted so nobly" as to return the money. He had long
pondered, too, over his relations with Aglaya, and had persuaded himself
that with such a strange, childish, innocent character as hers, things
might have ended very differently. Remorse then seized him; he threw up
his post, and buried himself in self-torment and reproach.

He lived at Ptitsin's, and openly showed contempt for the latter, though
he always listened to his advice, and was sensible enough to ask for it
when he wanted it. Gavrila Ardalionovitch was angry with Ptitsin because
the latter did not care to become a Rothschild. "If you are to be a
Jew," he said, "do it properly--squeeze people right and left, show some
character; be the King of the Jews while you are about it."

Ptitsin was quiet and not easily offended--he only laughed. But on one
occasion he explained seriously to Gania that he was no Jew, that he
did nothing dishonest, that he could not help the market price of money,
that, thanks to his accurate habits, he had already a good footing and
was respected, and that his business was flourishing.

"I shan't ever be a Rothschild, and there is no reason why I should," he
added, smiling; "but I shall have a house in the Liteynaya, perhaps two,
and that will be enough for me." "Who knows but what I may have three!"
he concluded to himself; but this dream, cherished inwardly, he never
confided to a soul.

Nature loves and favours such people. Ptitsin will certainly have his
reward, not three houses, but four, precisely because from childhood up
he had realized that he would never be a Rothschild. That will be the
limit of Ptitsin's fortune, and, come what may, he will never have more
than four houses.

Varvara Ardalionovna was not like her brother. She too, had passionate
desires, but they were persistent rather than impetuous. Her plans were
as wise as her methods of carrying them out. No doubt she also belonged
to the category of ordinary people who dream of being original, but she
soon discovered that she had not a grain of true originality, and she
did not let it trouble her too much. Perhaps a certain kind of pride
came to her help. She made her first concession to the demands of
practical life with great resolution when she consented to marry
Ptitsin. However, when she married she did not say to herself, "Never
mind a mean action if it leads to the end in view," as her brother would
certainly have said in such a case; it is quite probable that he may
have said it when he expressed his elder-brotherly satisfaction at her
decision. Far from this; Varvara Ardalionovna did not marry until she
felt convinced that her future husband was unassuming, agreeable,
almost cultured, and that nothing on earth would tempt him to a really
dishonourable deed. As to small meannesses, such trifles did not trouble
her. Indeed, who is free from them? It is absurd to expect the ideal!
Besides, she knew that her marriage would provide a refuge for all her
family. Seeing Gania unhappy, she was anxious to help him, in spite of
their former disputes and misunderstandings. Ptitsin, in a friendly way,
would press his brother-in-law to enter the army. "You know," he said
sometimes, jokingly, "you despise generals and generaldom, but you will
see that 'they' will all end by being generals in their turn. You will
see it if you live long enough!"

"But why should they suppose that I despise generals?" Gania thought
sarcastically to himself.

To serve her brother's interests, Varvara Ardalionovna was constantly at
the Epanchins' house, helped by the fact that in childhood she and Gania
had played with General Ivan Fedorovitch's daughters. It would have been
inconsistent with her character if in these visits she had been pursuing
a chimera; her project was not chimerical at all; she was building on
a firm basis--on her knowledge of the character of the Epanchin family,
especially Aglaya, whom she studied closely. All Varvara's efforts
were directed towards bringing Aglaya and Gania together. Perhaps she
achieved some result; perhaps, also, she made the mistake of depending
too much upon her brother, and expecting more from him than he would
ever be capable of giving. However this may be, her manoeuvres were
skilful enough. For weeks at a time she would never mention Gania. Her
attitude was modest but dignified, and she was always extremely truthful
and sincere. Examining the depths of her conscience, she found nothing
to reproach herself with, and this still further strengthened her in
her designs. But Varvara Ardalionovna sometimes remarked that she felt
spiteful; that there was a good deal of vanity in her, perhaps even of
wounded vanity. She noticed this at certain times more than at others,
and especially after her visits to the Epanchins.

Today, as I have said, she returned from their house with a heavy
feeling of dejection. There was a sensation of bitterness, a sort of
mocking contempt, mingled with it.

Arrived at her own house, Varia heard a considerable commotion going
on in the upper storey, and distinguished the voices of her father and
brother. On entering the salon she found Gania pacing up and down at
frantic speed, pale with rage and almost tearing his hair. She frowned,
and subsided on to the sofa with a tired air, and without taking the
trouble to remove her hat. She very well knew that if she kept quiet and
asked her brother nothing about his reason for tearing up and down the
room, his wrath would fall upon her head. So she hastened to put the
question:

"The old story, eh?"

"Old story? No! Heaven knows what's up now--I don't! Father has simply
gone mad; mother's in floods of tears. Upon my word, Varia, I must kick
him out of the house; or else go myself," he added, probably remembering
that he could not well turn people out of a house which was not his own.

"You must make allowances," murmured Varia.

"Make allowances? For whom? Him--the old blackguard? No, no, Varia--that
won't do! It won't do, I tell you! And look at the swagger of the man!
He's all to blame himself, and yet he puts on so much 'side' that you'd
think--my word!--'It's too much trouble to go through the gate, you must
break the fence for me!' That's the sort of air he puts on; but what's
the matter with you, Varia? What a curious expression you have!"

"I'm all right," said Varia, in a tone that sounded as though she were
all wrong.

Gania looked more intently at her.

"You've been _there?_" he asked, suddenly.

"Yes."

"Did you find out anything?"

"Nothing unexpected. I discovered that it's all true. My husband was
wiser than either of us. Just as he suspected from the beginning, so it
has fallen out. Where is he?"

"Out. Well--what has happened?--go on."

"The prince is formally engaged to her--that's settled. The elder
sisters told me about it. Aglaya has agreed. They don't attempt to
conceal it any longer; you know how mysterious and secret they have all
been up to now. Adelaida's wedding is put off again, so that both can be
married on one day. Isn't that delightfully romantic? Somebody ought to
write a poem on it. Sit down and write an ode instead of tearing up
and down like that. This evening Princess Bielokonski is to arrive; she
comes just in time--they have a party tonight. He is to be presented
to old Bielokonski, though I believe he knows her already; probably the
engagement will be openly announced. They are only afraid that he may
knock something down, or trip over something when he comes into the
room. It would be just like him."

Gania listened attentively, but to his sister's astonishment he was by
no means so impressed by this news (which should, she thought, have been
so important to him) as she had expected.

"Well, it was clear enough all along," he said, after a moment's
reflection. "So that's the end," he added, with a disagreeable smile,
continuing to walk up and down the room, but much slower than before,
and glancing slyly into his sister's face.

"It's a good thing that you take it philosophically, at all events,"
said Varia. "I'm really very glad of it."

"Yes, it's off our hands--off _yours_, I should say."

"I think I have served you faithfully. I never even asked you what
happiness you expected to find with Aglaya."

"Did I ever expect to find happiness with Aglaya?"

"Come, come, don't overdo your philosophy. Of course you did. Now it's
all over, and a good thing, too; pair of fools that we have been! I
confess I have never been able to look at it seriously. I busied myself
in it for your sake, thinking that there was no knowing what might
happen with a funny girl like that to deal with. There were ninety to
one chances against it. To this moment I can't make out why you wished
for it."

"H'm! now, I suppose, you and your husband will never weary of egging
me on to work again. You'll begin your lectures about perseverance and
strength of will, and all that. I know it all by heart," said Gania,
laughing.

"He's got some new idea in his head," thought Varia. "Are they pleased
over there--the parents?" asked Gania, suddenly.

"N--no, I don't think they are. You can judge for yourself. I think the
general is pleased enough; her mother is a little uneasy. She always
loathed the idea of the prince as a _husband_; everybody knows that."

"Of course, naturally. The bridegroom is an impossible and ridiculous
one. I mean, has _she_ given her formal consent?"

"She has not said 'no,' up to now, and that's all. It was sure to be so
with her. You know what she is like. You know how absurdly shy she is.
You remember how she used to hide in a cupboard as a child, so as to
avoid seeing visitors, for hours at a time. She is just the same now;
but, do you know, I think there is something serious in the matter, even
from her side; I feel it, somehow. She laughs at the prince, they say,
from morn to night in order to hide her real feelings; but you may be
sure she finds occasion to say something or other to him on the sly, for
he himself is in a state of radiant happiness. He walks in the clouds;
they say he is extremely funny just now; I heard it from themselves.
They seemed to be laughing at me in their sleeves--those elder girls--I
don't know why."

Gania had begun to frown, and probably Varia added this last sentence
in order to probe his thought. However, at this moment, the noise began
again upstairs.

"I'll turn him out!" shouted Gania, glad of the opportunity of venting
his vexation. "I shall just turn him out--we can't have this."

"Yes, and then he'll go about the place and disgrace us as he did
yesterday."

"How 'as he did yesterday'? What do you mean? What did he do yesterday?"
asked Gania, in alarm.

"Why, goodness me, don't you know?" Varia stopped short.

"What? You don't mean to say that he went there yesterday!" cried Gania,
flushing red with shame and anger. "Good heavens, Varia! Speak! You have
just been there. _Was_ he there or not, _quick?_" And Gania rushed for the
door. Varia followed and caught him by both hands.

"What are you doing? Where are you going to? You can't let him go now;
if you do he'll go and do something worse."

"What did he do there? What did he say?" "They couldn't tell me
themselves; they couldn't make head or tail of it; but he frightened
them all. He came to see the general, who was not at home; so he asked
for Lizabetha Prokofievna. First of all, he begged her for some place,
or situation, for work of some kind, and then he began to complain about
_us_, about me and my husband, and you, especially _you_; he said a lot of
things."

"Oh! couldn't you find out?" muttered Gania, trembling hysterically.

"No--nothing more than that. Why, they couldn't understand him
themselves; and very likely didn't tell me all."

Gania seized his head with both hands and tottered to the window; Varia
sat down at the other window.

"Funny girl, Aglaya," she observed, after a pause. "When she left me she
said, 'Give my special and personal respects to your parents; I shall
certainly find an opportunity to see your father one day,' and so
serious over it. She's a strange creature."

"Wasn't she joking? She was speaking sarcastically!" "Not a bit of it;
that's just the strange part of it."

"Does she know about father, do you think--or not?"

"That they do _not_ know about it in the house is quite certain, the rest
of them, I mean; but you have given me an idea. Aglaya perhaps knows.
She alone, though, if anyone; for the sisters were as astonished as I
was to hear her speak so seriously. If she knows, the prince must have
told her."

"Oh! it's not a great matter to guess who told her. A thief! A thief in
our family, and the head of the family, too!"

"Oh! nonsense!" cried Varia, angrily. "That was nothing but a drunkard's
tale. Nonsense! Why, who invented the whole thing--Lebedeff and the
prince--a pretty pair! Both were probably drunk."

"Father is a drunkard and a thief; I am a beggar, and the husband of my
sister is a usurer," continued Gania, bitterly. "There was a pretty list
of advantages with which to enchant the heart of Aglaya."

"That same husband of your sister, the usurer--"

"Feeds me? Go on. Don't stand on ceremony, pray."

"Don't lose your temper. You are just like a schoolboy. You think that
all this sort of thing would harm you in Aglaya's eyes, do you? You
little know her character. She is capable of refusing the most brilliant
party, and running away and starving in a garret with some wretched
student; that's the sort of girl she is. You never could or did
understand how interesting you would have seen in her eyes if you had
come firmly and proudly through our misfortunes. The prince has simply
caught her with hook and line; firstly, because he never thought of
fishing for her, and secondly, because he is an idiot in the eyes of
most people. It's quite enough for her that by accepting him she puts
her family out and annoys them all round--that's what she likes. You
don't understand these things."

"We shall see whether I understand or no!" said Gania, enigmatically.
"But I shouldn't like her to know all about father, all the same. I
thought the prince would manage to hold his tongue about this, at least.
He prevented Lebedeff spreading the news--he wouldn't even tell me all
when I asked him--"

"Then you must see that he is not responsible. What does it matter to
you now, in any case? What are you hoping for still? If you _have_ a hope
left, it is that your suffering air may soften her heart towards you."

"Oh, she would funk a scandal like anyone else. You are all tarred with
one brush!"

"What! _Aglaya_ would have funked? You are a chicken-hearted fellow,
Gania!" said Varia, looking at her brother with contempt. "Not one of
us is worth much. Aglaya may be a wild sort of a girl, but she is far
nobler than any of us, a thousand times nobler!"

"Well--come! there's nothing to get cross about," said Gania.

"All I'm afraid of is--mother. I'm afraid this scandal about father may
come to her ears; perhaps it has already. I am dreadfully afraid."

"It undoubtedly has already!" observed Gania.

Varia had risen from her place and had started to go upstairs to her
mother; but at this observation of Gania's she turned and gazed at him
attentively.

"Who could have told her?"

"Hippolyte, probably. He would think it the most delightful amusement in
the world to tell her of it the instant he moved over here; I haven't a
doubt of it."

"But how could he know anything of it? Tell me that. Lebedeff and the
prince determined to tell no one--even Colia knows nothing."

"What, Hippolyte? He found it out himself, of course. Why, you have no
idea what a cunning little animal he is; dirty little gossip! He has
the most extraordinary nose for smelling out other people's secrets, or
anything approaching to scandal. Believe it or not, but I'm pretty sure
he has got round Aglaya. If he hasn't, he soon will. Rogojin is intimate
with him, too. How the prince doesn't notice it, I can't understand. The
little wretch considers me his enemy now and does his best to catch me
tripping. What on earth does it matter to him, when he's dying? However,
you'll see; I shall catch _him_ tripping yet, and not he me."

"Why did you get him over here, if you hate him so? And is it really
worth your while to try to score off him?"

"Why, it was yourself who advised me to bring him over!"

"I thought he might be useful. You know he is in love with Aglaya
himself, now, and has written to her; he has even written to Lizabetha
Prokofievna!"

"Oh! he's not dangerous there!" cried Gania, laughing angrily. "However,
I believe there is something of that sort in the air; he is very likely
to be in love, for he is a mere boy. But he won't write anonymous
letters to the old lady; that would be too audacious a thing for him to
attempt; but I dare swear the very first thing he did was to show me up
to Aglaya as a base deceiver and intriguer. I confess I was fool enough
to attempt something through him at first. I thought he would throw
himself into my service out of revengeful feelings towards the prince,
the sly little beast! But I know him better now. As for the theft, he
may have heard of it from the widow in Petersburg, for if the old man
committed himself to such an act, he can have done it for no other
object but to give the money to her. Hippolyte said to me, without any
prelude, that the general had promised the widow four hundred roubles.
Of course I understood, and the little wretch looked at me with a nasty
sort of satisfaction. I know him; you may depend upon it he went and
told mother too, for the pleasure of wounding her. And why doesn't he
die, I should like to know? He undertook to die within three weeks,
and here he is getting fatter. His cough is better, too. It was only
yesterday that he said that was the second day he hadn't coughed blood."

"Well, turn him out!"

"I don't _hate_, I despise him," said Gania, grandly. "Well, I do hate
him, if you like!" he added, with a sudden access of rage, "and I'll
tell him so to his face, even when he's dying! If you had but read his
confession--good Lord! what refinement of impudence! Oh, but I'd have
liked to whip him then and there, like a schoolboy, just to see how
surprised he would have been! Now he hates everybody because he--Oh, I
say, what on earth are they doing there! Listen to that noise! I really
can't stand this any longer. Ptitsin!" he cried, as the latter entered
the room, "what in the name of goodness are we coming to? Listen to
that--"

But the noise came rapidly nearer, the door burst open, and old General
Ivolgin, raging, furious, purple-faced, and trembling with anger, rushed
in. He was followed by Nina Alexandrovna, Colia, and behind the rest,
Hippolyte.

II.

Hippolyte had now been five days at the Ptitsins'. His flitting from the
prince's to these new quarters had been brought about quite naturally
and without many words. He did not quarrel with the prince--in fact,
they seemed to part as friends. Gania, who had been hostile enough on
that eventful evening, had himself come to see him a couple of days
later, probably in obedience to some sudden impulse. For some reason or
other, Rogojin too had begun to visit the sick boy. The prince thought
it might be better for him to move away from his (the prince's) house.
Hippolyte informed him, as he took his leave, that Ptitsin "had been
kind enough to offer him a corner," and did not say a word about Gania,
though Gania had procured his invitation, and himself came to fetch him
away. Gania noticed this at the time, and put it to Hippolyte's debit on
account.

Gania was right when he told his sister that Hippolyte was getting
better; that he was better was clear at the first glance. He entered the
room now last of all, deliberately, and with a disagreeable smile on his
lips.

Nina Alexandrovna came in, looking frightened. She had changed much
since we last saw her, half a year ago, and had grown thin and pale.
Colia looked worried and perplexed. He could not understand the vagaries
of the general, and knew nothing of the last achievement of that worthy,
which had caused so much commotion in the house. But he could see that
his father had of late changed very much, and that he had begun to
behave in so extraordinary a fashion both at home and abroad that he
was not like the same man. What perplexed and disturbed him as much as
anything was that his father had entirely given up drinking during the
last few days. Colia knew that he had quarrelled with both Lebedeff and
the prince, and had just bought a small bottle of vodka and brought it
home for his father.

"Really, mother," he had assured Nina Alexandrovna upstairs, "really you
had better let him drink. He has not had a drop for three days; he must
be suffering agonies-- The general now entered the room, threw the door
wide open, and stood on the threshold trembling with indignation.

"Look here, my dear sir," he began, addressing Ptitsin in a very loud
tone of voice; "if you have really made up your mind to sacrifice an old
man--your father too or at all events father of your wife--an old man
who has served his emperor--to a wretched little atheist like this, all
I can say is, sir, my foot shall cease to tread your floors. Make your
choice, sir; make your choice quickly, if you please! Me or this--screw!
Yes, screw, sir; I said it accidentally, but let the word stand--this
screw, for he screws and drills himself into my soul--"

"Hadn't you better say corkscrew?" said Hippolyte.

"No, sir, _not_ corkscrew. I am a general, not a bottle, sir. Make your
choice, sir--me or him."

Here Colia handed him a chair, and he subsided into it, breathless with
rage.

"Hadn't you better--better--take a nap?" murmured the stupefied Ptitsin.

"A nap?" shrieked the general. "I am not drunk, sir; you insult me!
I see," he continued, rising, "I see that all are against me here.
Enough--I go; but know, sirs--know that--"

He was not allowed to finish his sentence. Somebody pushed him back into
his chair, and begged him to be calm. Nina Alexandrovna trembled, and
cried quietly. Gania retired to the window in disgust.

"But what have I done? What is his grievance?" asked Hippolyte,
grinning.

"What have you done, indeed?" put in Nina Alexandrovna. "You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, teasing an old man like that--and in your position,
too."

"And pray what _is_ my position, madame? I have the greatest respect for
you, personally; but--"

"He's a little screw," cried the general; "he drills holes in my heart
and soul. He wishes me to be a pervert to atheism. Know, you young
greenhorn, that I was covered with honours before ever you were born;
and you are nothing better than a wretched little worm, torn in two with
coughing, and dying slowly of your own malice and unbelief. What did
Gavrila bring you over here for? They're all against me, even to my own
son--all against me."

"Oh, come--nonsense!" cried Gania; "if you did not go shaming us all
over the town, things might be better for all parties."

"What--shame you? I?--what do you mean, you young calf? I shame you? I
can only do you honour, sir; I cannot shame you."

He jumped up from his chair in a fit of uncontrollable rage. Gania was
very angry too.

"Honour, indeed!" said the latter, with contempt.

"What do you say, sir?" growled the general, taking a step towards him.

"I say that I have but to open my mouth, and you--"

Gania began, but did not finish. The two--father and son--stood before
one another, both unspeakably agitated, especially Gania.

"Gania, Gania, reflect!" cried his mother, hurriedly.

"It's all nonsense on both sides," snapped out Varia. "Let them alone,
mother."

"It's only for mother's sake that I spare him," said Gania, tragically.

"Speak!" said the general, beside himself with rage and excitement;
"speak--under the penalty of a father's curse!"

"Oh, father's curse be hanged--you don't frighten me that way!" said
Gania. "Whose fault is it that you have been as mad as a March hare all
this week? It is just a week--you see, I count the days. Take care
now; don't provoke me too much, or I'll tell all. Why did you go to the
Epanchins' yesterday--tell me that? And you call yourself an old
man, too, with grey hair, and father of a family! H'm--nice sort of a
father."

"Be quiet, Gania," cried Colia. "Shut up, you fool!"

"Yes, but how have I offended him?" repeated Hippolyte, still in the
same jeering voice. "Why does he call me a screw? You all heard it. He
came to me himself and began telling me about some Captain Eropegoff.
I don't wish for your company, general. I always avoided you--you know
that. What have I to do with Captain Eropegoff? All I did was to express
my opinion that probably Captain Eropegoff never existed at all!"

"Of course he never existed!" Gania interrupted.

But the general only stood stupefied and gazed around in a dazed way.
Gania's speech had impressed him, with its terrible candour. For the
first moment or two he could find no words to answer him, and it was
only when Hippolyte burst out laughing, and said:

"There, you see! Even your own son supports my statement that there
never was such a person as Captain Eropegoff!" that the old fellow
muttered confusedly:

"Kapiton Eropegoff--not Captain Eropegoff!--Kapiton--major
retired--Eropegoff--Kapiton."

"Kapiton didn't exist either!" persisted Gania, maliciously.

"What? Didn't exist?" cried the poor general, and a deep blush suffused
his face.

"That'll do, Gania!" cried Varia and Ptitsin.

"Shut up, Gania!" said Colia.

But this intercession seemed to rekindle the general.

"What did you mean, sir, that he didn't exist? Explain yourself," he
repeated, angrily.

"Because he _didn't_ exist--never could and never did--there! You'd better
drop the subject, I warn you!"

"And this is my son--my own son--whom I--oh, gracious Heaven!
Eropegoff--Eroshka Eropegoff didn't exist!"

"Ha, ha! it's Eroshka now," laughed Hippolyte.

"No, sir, Kapitoshka--not Eroshka. I mean, Kapiton Alexeyevitch--retired
major--married Maria Petrovna Lu--Lu--he was my friend and
companion--Lutugoff--from our earliest beginnings. I closed his eyes for
him--he was killed. Kapiton Eropegoff never existed! tfu!"

The general shouted in his fury; but it was to be concluded that his
wrath was not kindled by the expressed doubt as to Kapiton's existence.
This was his scapegoat; but his excitement was caused by something quite
different. As a rule he would have merely shouted down the doubt as
to Kapiton, told a long yarn about his friend, and eventually retired
upstairs to his room. But today, in the strange uncertainty of human
nature, it seemed to require but so small an offence as this to make
his cup to overflow. The old man grew purple in the face, he raised his
hands. "Enough of this!" he yelled. "My curse--away, out of the house
I go! Colia, bring my bag away!" He left the room hastily and in a
paroxysm of rage.

His wife, Colia, and Ptitsin ran out after him.

"What have you done now?" said Varia to Gania. "He'll probably be making
off _there_ again! What a disgrace it all is!"

"Well, he shouldn't steal," cried Gania, panting with fury. And just at
this moment his eye met Hippolyte's.

"As for you, sir," he cried, "you should at least remember that you are
in a strange house and--receiving hospitality; you should not take the
opportunity of tormenting an old man, sir, who is too evidently out of
his mind."

Hippolyte looked furious, but he restrained himself.

"I don't quite agree with you that your father is out of his mind," he
observed, quietly. "On the contrary, I cannot help thinking he has been
less demented of late. Don't you think so? He has grown so cunning and
careful, and weighs his words so deliberately; he spoke to me about that
Kapiton fellow with an object, you know! Just fancy--he wanted me to--"

"Oh, devil take what he wanted you to do! Don't try to be too cunning
with me, young man!" shouted Gania. "If you are aware of the real reason
for my father's present condition (and you have kept such an excellent
spying watch during these last few days that you are sure to be aware of
it)--you had no right whatever to torment the--unfortunate man, and to
worry my mother by your exaggerations of the affair; because the whole
business is nonsense--simply a drunken freak, and nothing more, quite
unproved by any evidence, and I don't believe that much of it!" (he
snapped his fingers). "But you must needs spy and watch over us all,
because you are a--a--"

"Screw!" laughed Hippolyte.

"Because you are a humbug, sir; and thought fit to worry people for half
an hour, and tried to frighten them into believing that you would shoot
yourself with your little empty pistol, pirouetting about and playing at
suicide! I gave you hospitality, you have fattened on it, your cough has
left you, and you repay all this--"

"Excuse me--two words! I am Varvara Ardalionovna's guest, not yours;
_you_ have extended no hospitality to me. On the contrary, if I am
not mistaken, I believe you are yourself indebted to Mr. Ptitsin's
hospitality. Four days ago I begged my mother to come down here and find
lodgings, because I certainly do feel better here, though I am not fat,
nor have I ceased to cough. I am today informed that my room is ready
for me; therefore, having thanked your sister and mother for their
kindness to me, I intend to leave the house this evening. I beg your
pardon--I interrupted you--I think you were about to add something?"

"Oh--if that is the state of affairs--" began Gania.

"Excuse me--I will take a seat," interrupted Hippolyte once more,
sitting down deliberately; "for I am not strong yet. Now then, I am
ready to hear you. Especially as this is the last chance we shall have
of a talk, and very likely the last meeting we shall ever have at all."

Gania felt a little guilty.

"I assure you I did not mean to reckon up debits and credits," he began,
"and if you--"

"I don't understand your condescension," said Hippolyte. "As for me, I
promised myself, on the first day of my arrival in this house, that
I would have the satisfaction of settling accounts with you in a very
thorough manner before I said good-bye to you. I intend to perform this
operation now, if you like; after you, though, of course."

"May I ask you to be so good as to leave this room?"

"You'd better speak out. You'll be sorry afterwards if you don't."

"Hippolyte, stop, please! It's so dreadfully undignified," said Varia.

"Well, only for the sake of a lady," said Hippolyte, laughing. "I
am ready to put off the reckoning, but only put it off, Varvara
Ardalionovna, because an explanation between your brother and myself has
become an absolute necessity, and I could not think of leaving the house
without clearing up all misunderstandings first."

"In a word, you are a wretched little scandal-monger," cried Gania, "and
you cannot go away without a scandal!"

"You see," said Hippolyte, coolly, "you can't restrain yourself. You'll
be dreadfully sorry afterwards if you don't speak out now. Come, you
shall have the first say. I'll wait."

Gania was silent and merely looked contemptuously at him.

"You won't? Very well. I shall be as short as possible, for my part. Two
or three times to-day I have had the word 'hospitality' pushed down my
throat; this is not fair. In inviting me here you yourself entrapped
me for your own use; you thought I wished to revenge myself upon the
prince. You heard that Aglaya Ivanovna had been kind to me and read my
confession. Making sure that I should give myself up to your interests,
you hoped that you might get some assistance out of me. I will not go
into details. I don't ask either admission or confirmation of this from
yourself; I am quite content to leave you to your conscience, and to
feel that we understand one another capitally."

"What a history you are weaving out of the most ordinary circumstances!"
cried Varia.

"I told you the fellow was nothing but a scandalmonger," said Gania.

"Excuse me, Varia Ardalionovna, I will proceed. I can, of course,
neither love nor respect the prince, though he is a good-hearted fellow,
if a little queer. But there is no need whatever for me to hate him. I
quite understood your brother when he first offered me aid against the
prince, though I did not show it; I knew well that your brother was
making a ridiculous mistake in me. I am ready to spare him, however,
even now; but solely out of respect for yourself, Varvara Ardalionovna.

"Having now shown you that I am not quite such a fool as I look, and
that I have to be fished for with a rod and line for a good long while
before I am caught, I will proceed to explain why I specially wished to
make your brother look a fool. That my motive power is hate, I do not
attempt to conceal. I have felt that before dying (and I am dying,
however much fatter I may appear to you), I must absolutely make a fool
of, at least, one of that class of men which has dogged me all my life,
which I hate so cordially, and which is so prominently represented by
your much esteemed brother. I should not enjoy paradise nearly so much
without having done this first. I hate you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
solely (this may seem curious to you, but I repeat)--solely because you
are the type, and incarnation, and head, and crown of the most impudent,
the most self-satisfied, the most vulgar and detestable form of
commonplaceness. You are ordinary of the ordinary; you have no chance of
ever fathering the pettiest idea of your own. And yet you are as jealous
and conceited as you can possibly be; you consider yourself a great
genius; of this you are persuaded, although there are dark moments of
doubt and rage, when even this fact seems uncertain. There are spots
of darkness on your horizon, though they will disappear when you become
completely stupid. But a long and chequered path lies before you, and
of this I am glad. In the first place you will never gain a certain
person."

"Come, come! This is intolerable! You had better stop, you little
mischief-making wretch!" cried Varia. Gania had grown very pale; he
trembled, but said nothing.

Hippolyte paused, and looked at him intently and with great
gratification. He then turned his gaze upon Varia, bowed, and went out,
without adding another word.

Gania might justly complain of the hardness with which fate treated him.
Varia dared not speak to him for a long while, as he strode past her,
backwards and forwards. At last he went and stood at the window, looking
out, with his back turned towards her. There was a fearful row going on
upstairs again.

"Are you off?" said Gania, suddenly, remarking that she had risen and
was about to leave the room. "Wait a moment--look at this."

He approached the table and laid a small sheet of paper before her. It
looked like a little note.

"Good heavens!" cried Varia, raising her hands.

This was the note:

"GAVRILA ARDOLIONOVITCH,--persuaded of your kindness of heart, I have
determined to ask your advice on a matter of great importance to myself.
I should like to meet you tomorrow morning at seven o'clock by the green
bench in the park. It is not far from our house. Varvara Ardalionovna,
who must accompany you, knows the place well.

"A. E."

"What on earth is one to make of a girl like that?" said Varia.

Gania, little as he felt inclined for swagger at this moment, could
not avoid showing his triumph, especially just after such humiliating
remarks as those of Hippolyte. A smile of self-satisfaction beamed on
his face, and Varia too was brimming over with delight.

"And this is the very day that they were to announce the engagement!
What will she do next?"

"What do you suppose she wants to talk about tomorrow?" asked Gania.

"Oh, _that's_ all the same! The chief thing is that she wants to see you
after six months' absence. Look here, Gania, this is a _serious_ business.
Don't swagger again and lose the game--play carefully, but don't funk,
do you understand? As if she could possibly avoid seeing what I have
been working for all this last six months! And just imagine, I was there
this morning and not a word of this! I was there, you know, on the sly.
The old lady did not know, or she would have kicked me out. I ran some
risk for you, you see. I did so want to find out, at all hazards."

Here there was a frantic noise upstairs once more; several people seemed
to be rushing downstairs at once.

"Now, Gania," cried Varia, frightened, "we can't let him go out! We
can't afford to have a breath of scandal about the town at this moment.
Run after him and beg his pardon--quick."

But the father of the family was out in the road already. Colia was
carrying his bag for him; Nina Alexandrovna stood and cried on the
doorstep; she wanted to run after the general, but Ptitsin kept her
back.

"You will only excite him more," he said. "He has nowhere else to go
to--he'll be back here in half an hour. I've talked it all over with
Colia; let him play the fool a bit, it will do him good."

"What are you up to? Where are you off to? You've nowhere to go to, you
know," cried Gania, out of the window.

"Come back, father; the neighbours will hear!" cried Varia.

The general stopped, turned round, raised his hands and remarked: "My
curse be upon this house!"

"Which observation should always be made in as theatrical a tone as
possible," muttered Gania, shutting the window with a bang.

The neighbours undoubtedly did hear. Varia rushed out of the room.

No sooner had his sister left him alone, than Gania took the note out of
his pocket, kissed it, and pirouetted around.

III.

As a general rule, old General Ivolgin's paroxysms ended in smoke. He
had before this experienced fits of sudden fury, but not very often,
because he was really a man of peaceful and kindly disposition. He had
tried hundreds of times to overcome the dissolute habits which he had
contracted of late years. He would suddenly remember that he was "a
father," would be reconciled with his wife, and shed genuine tears.
His feeling for Nina Alexandrovna amounted almost to adoration; she had
pardoned so much in silence, and loved him still in spite of the state
of degradation into which he had fallen. But the general's struggles
with his own weakness never lasted very long. He was, in his way, an
impetuous man, and a quiet life of repentance in the bosom of his family
soon became insupportable to him. In the end he rebelled, and flew into
rages which he regretted, perhaps, even as he gave way to them, but
which were beyond his control. He picked quarrels with everyone,
began to hold forth eloquently, exacted unlimited respect, and at last
disappeared from the house, and sometimes did not return for a long
time. He had given up interfering in the affairs of his family for
two years now, and knew nothing about them but what he gathered from
hearsay.

But on this occasion there was something more serious than usual.
Everyone seemed to know something, but to be afraid to talk about it.

The general had turned up in the bosom of his family two or three days
before, but not, as usual, with the olive branch of peace in his hand,
not in the garb of penitence--in which he was usually clad on such
occasions--but, on the contrary, in an uncommonly bad temper. He had
arrived in a quarrelsome mood, pitching into everyone he came across,
and talking about all sorts and kinds of subjects in the most unexpected
manner, so that it was impossible to discover what it was that was
really putting him out. At moments he would be apparently quite bright
and happy; but as a rule he would sit moody and thoughtful. He would
abruptly commence to hold forth about the Epanchins, about Lebedeff, or
the prince, and equally abruptly would stop short and refuse to speak
another word, answering all further questions with a stupid smile,
unconscious that he was smiling, or that he had been asked a question.
The whole of the previous night he had spent tossing about and groaning,
and poor Nina Alexandrovna had been busy making cold compresses and warm
fomentations and so on, without being very clear how to apply them. He
had fallen asleep after a while, but not for long, and had awaked in
a state of violent hypochondria which had ended in his quarrel with
Hippolyte, and the solemn cursing of Ptitsin's establishment generally.
It was also observed during those two or three days that he was in a
state of morbid self-esteem, and was specially touchy on all points of
honour. Colia insisted, in discussing the matter with his mother, that
all this was but the outcome of abstinence from drink, or perhaps of
pining after Lebedeff, with whom up to this time the general had been
upon terms of the greatest friendship; but with whom, for some reason
or other, he had quarrelled a few days since, parting from him in great
wrath. There had also been a scene with the prince. Colia had asked an
explanation of the latter, but had been forced to conclude that he was
not told the whole truth.

If Hippolyte and Nina Alexandrovna had, as Gania suspected, had some
special conversation about the general's actions, it was strange that
the malicious youth, whom Gania had called a scandal-monger to his face,
had not allowed himself a similar satisfaction with Colia.

The fact is that probably Hippolyte was not quite so black as Gania
painted him; and it was hardly likely that he had informed Nina
Alexandrovna of certain events, of which we know, for the mere pleasure
of giving her pain. We must never forget that human motives are
generally far more complicated than we are apt to suppose, and that we
can very rarely accurately describe the motives of another. It is much
better for the writer, as a rule, to content himself with the bare
statement of events; and we shall take this line with regard to the
catastrophe recorded above, and shall state the remaining events
connected with the general's trouble shortly, because we feel that
we have already given to this secondary character in our story more
attention than we originally intended.

The course of events had marched in the following order. When Lebedeff
returned, in company with the general, after their expedition to town a
few days since, for the purpose of investigation, he brought the prince
no information whatever. If the latter had not himself been occupied
with other thoughts and impressions at the time, he must have observed
that Lebedeff not only was very uncommunicative, but even appeared
anxious to avoid him.

When the prince did give the matter a little attention, he recalled
the fact that during these days he had always found Lebedeff to be in
radiantly good spirits, when they happened to meet; and further, that
the general and Lebedeff were always together. The two friends did not
seem ever to be parted for a moment.

Occasionally the prince heard loud talking and laughing upstairs, and
once he detected the sound of a jolly soldier's song going on above, and
recognized the unmistakable bass of the general's voice. But the sudden
outbreak of song did not last; and for an hour afterwards the animated
sound of apparently drunken conversation continued to be heard from
above. At length there was the clearest evidence of a grand mutual
embracing, and someone burst into tears. Shortly after this, however,
there was a violent but short-lived quarrel, with loud talking on both
sides.

All these days Colia had been in a state of great mental preoccupation.
Muishkin was usually out all day, and only came home late at night. On
his return he was invariably informed that Colia had been looking for
him. However, when they did meet, Colia never had anything particular to
tell him, excepting that he was highly dissatisfied with the general and
his present condition of mind and behaviour.

"They drag each other about the place," he said, "and get drunk together
at the pub close by here, and quarrel in the street on the way home, and
embrace one another after it, and don't seem to part for a moment."

When the prince pointed out that there was nothing new about that, for
that they had always behaved in this manner together, Colia did not know
what to say; in fact he could not explain what it was that specially
worried him, just now, about his father.

On the morning following the bacchanalian songs and quarrels recorded
above, as the prince stepped out of the house at about eleven o'clock,
the general suddenly appeared before him, much agitated.

"I have long sought the honour and opportunity of meeting
you--much-esteemed Lef Nicolaievitch," he murmured, pressing the
prince's hand very hard, almost painfully so; "long--very long."

The prince begged him to step in and sit down.

"No--I will not sit down,--I am keeping you, I see,--another time!--I
think I may be permitted to congratulate you upon the realization of
your heart's best wishes, is it not so?"

"What best wishes?"

The prince blushed. He thought, as so many in his position do, that
nobody had seen, heard, noticed, or understood anything.

"Oh--be easy, sir, be easy! I shall not wound your tenderest feelings.
I've been through it all myself, and I know well how unpleasant it is
when an outsider sticks his nose in where he is not wanted. I experience
this every morning. I came to speak to you about another matter, though,
an important matter. A very important matter, prince."

The latter requested him to take a seat once more, and sat down himself.

"Well--just for one second, then. The fact is, I came for advice. Of
course I live now without any very practical objects in life; but,
being full of self-respect, in which quality the ordinary Russian is so
deficient as a rule, and of activity, I am desirous, in a word, prince,
of placing myself and my wife and children in a position of--in fact, I
want advice."

The prince commended his aspirations with warmth.

"Quite so--quite so! But this is all mere nonsense. I came here to speak
of something quite different, something very important, prince. And
I have determined to come to you as to a man in whose sincerity and
nobility of feeling I can trust like--like--are you surprised at my
words, prince?"

The prince was watching his guest, if not with much surprise, at all
events with great attention and curiosity.

The old man was very pale; every now and then his lips trembled, and his
hands seemed unable to rest quietly, but continually moved from place to
place. He had twice already jumped up from his chair and sat down again
without being in the least aware of it. He would take up a book from
the table and open it--talking all the while,--look at the heading of a
chapter, shut it and put it back again, seizing another immediately, but
holding it unopened in his hand, and waving it in the air as he spoke.
