that; I'll tell you why afterwards. I want to remember it word for word.
I want it word for word."

Sofya Matveyevna knew the gospel well and at once found the passage in
St. Luke which I have chosen as the motto of my record. I quote it here
again:

  "'And there was there one herd of many swine feeding on the mountain;
  and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And
  he suffered them.

  "'Then went the devils out of the man and entered into the swine;
  and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were
  choked.

  "'When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and
  told it in the city and in the country.

  "'Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus and found
  the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of
  Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind; and they were afraid.'"

"My friend," said Stepan Trofimovitch in great excitement "_savez-vous,_
that wonderful and... extraordinary passage has been a stumbling-block
to me all my life... _dans ce livre_.... so much so that I remembered
those verses from childhood. Now an idea has occurred to me; _une
comparaison._ A great number of ideas keep coming into my mind now. You
see, that's exactly like our Russia, those devils that come out of the
sick man and enter into the swine. They are all the sores, all the foul
contagions, all the impurities, all the devils great and small that have
multiplied in that great invalid, our beloved Russia, in the course of
ages and ages. _Oui, cette Russie que j'aimais toujours._ But a great
idea and a great Will will encompass it from on high, as with that
lunatic possessed of devils... and all those devils will come forth, all
the impurity, all the rottenness that was putrefying on the surface ...
and they will beg of themselves to enter into swine; and indeed maybe
they have entered into them already! They are we, we and those... and
Petrusha and _les autres avec lui..._ and I perhaps at the head of them,
and we shall cast ourselves down, possessed and raving, from the rocks
into the sea, and we shall all be drowned--and a good thing too, for
that is all we are fit for. But the sick man will be healed and
'will sit at the feet of Jesus,' and all will look upon him with
astonishment.... My dear, _vous comprendrez après,_ but now it excites me
very much.... _Vous comprendrez après. Nous comprendrons ensemble._"

He sank into delirium and at last lost consciousness. So it went on all
the following day. Sofya Matveyevna sat beside him, crying. She scarcely
slept at all for three nights, and avoided seeing the people of the
house, who were, she felt, beginning to take some steps. Deliverance
only came on the third day. In the morning Stepan Trofimovitch returned
to consciousness, recognised her, and held out his hand to her. She
crossed herself hopefully. He wanted to look out of the window. _"Tiens,
un lac!"_ he said. "Good heavens, I had not seen it before!..." At that
moment there was the rumble of a carriage at the cottage door and a
great hubbub in the house followed.

III

It was Varvara Petrovna herself. She had arrived, with Darya Pavlovna,
in a closed carriage drawn by four horses, with two footmen. The marvel
had happened in the simplest way: Anisim, dying of curiosity, went to
Varvara Petrovna's the day after he reached the town and gossiped to
the servants, telling them he had met Stepan Trofimovitch alone in a
village, that the latter had been seen by peasants walking by himself
on the high road, and that he had set off for Spasov by way of Ustyevo
accompanied by Sofya Matveyevna. As Varvara Petrovna was, for her
part, in terrible anxiety and had done everything she could to find her
fugitive friend, she was at once told about Anisim. When she had heard
his story, especially the details of the departure for Ustyevo in a cart
in the company of some Sofya Matveyevna, she instantly got ready and set
off post-haste for Ustyevo herself.

Her stern and peremptory voice resounded through the cottage; even the
landlord and his wife were intimidated. She had only stopped to question
them and make inquiries, being persuaded that Stepan Trofimovitch must
have reached Spasov long before. Learning that he was still here and
ill, she entered the cottage in great agitation.

"Well, where is he? Ah, that's you!" she cried, seeing Sofya Matveyevna,
who appeared at that very instant in the doorway of the next room. "I
can guess from your shameless face that it's you. Go away, you vile
hussy! Don't let me find a trace of her in the house! Turn her out, or
else, my girl, I'll get you locked up for good. Keep her safe for a time
in another house. She's been in prison once already in the town; she can
go back there again. And you, my good man, don't dare to let anyone in
while I am here, I beg of you. I am Madame Stavrogin, and I'll take the
whole house. As for you, my dear, you'll have to give me a full account
of it all."

The familiar sounds overwhelmed Stepan Trofimovitch. He began to
tremble. But she had already stepped behind the screen. With flashing
eyes she drew up a chair with her foot, and, sinking back in it, she
shouted to Dasha:

"Go away for a time! Stay in the other room. Why are you so inquisitive?
And shut the door properly after you."

For some time she gazed in silence with a sort of predatory look into
his frightened face.

"Well, how are you getting on, Stepan Trofimovitch? So you've been
enjoying yourself?" broke from her with ferocious irony.

_"Chère,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch faltered, not knowing what he was saying,
"I've learnt to know real life in Russia... _et je prêcherai l'Evangile._"

"Oh, shameless, ungrateful man!" she wailed suddenly, clasping her
hands. "As though you had not disgraced me enough, you've taken up
with... oh, you shameless old reprobate!"

_"Chère..."_ His voice failed him and he could not articulate a syllable
but simply gazed with eyes wide with horror.

"Who is she?"

"_C'est un ange; c'était plus qu'un ange pour moi._ She's been all
night... Oh, don't shout, don't frighten her, _chère, chère..._"

With a loud noise, Varvara Petrovna pushed back her chair, uttering a
loud cry of alarm.

"Water, water!"

Though he returned to consciousness, she was still shaking with terror,
and, with pale cheeks, looked at his distorted face. It was only then,
for the first time, that she guessed the seriousness of his illness.

"Darya," she whispered suddenly to Darya Pavlovna, "send at once for the
doctor, for Salzfish; let Yegorytch go at once. Let him hire horses here
and get another carriage from the town. He must be here by night."

Dasha flew to do her bidding. Stepan Trofimovitch still gazed at her
with the same wide-open, frightened eyes; his blanched lips quivered.

"Wait a bit, Stepan Trofimovitch, wait a bit, my dear!" she said,
coaxing him like a child. "There, there, wait a bit! Darya will come
back and... My goodness, the landlady, the landlady, you come, anyway,
my good woman!"

In her impatience she ran herself to the landlady.

"Fetch that woman back at once, this minute. Bring her back, bring her
back!"

Fortunately Sofya Matveyevna had not yet had time to get away and was
only just going out of the gate with her pack and her bag. She was
brought back. She was so panic-stricken that she was trembling in every
limb. Varvara Petrovna pounced on her like a hawk on a chicken, seized
her by the hand and dragged her impulsively to Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Here, here she is, then. I've not eaten her. You thought I'd eaten
her."

Stepan Trofimovitch clutched Varvara Petrovna's hand, raised it to his
eyes, and burst into tears, sobbing violently and convulsively.

"There, calm yourself, there, there, my dear, there, poor dear man!
Ach, mercy on us! Calm yourself, will you?" she shouted frantically.
"Oh, you bane of my life!"

"My dear," Stepan Trofimovitch murmured at last, addressing Sofya
Matveyevna, "stay out there, my dear, I want to say something here...."

Sofya Matveyevna hurried out at once.

_"Chérie... chérie..."_ he gasped.

"Don't talk for a bit, Stepan Trofimovitch, wait a little till you've
rested. Here's some water. Do wait, will you!"

She sat down on the chair again. Stepan Trofimovitch held her hand
tight. For a long while she would not allow him to speak. He raised her
hand to his lips and fell to kissing it. She set her teeth and looked
away into the corner of the room.

_"Je vous aimais,"_ broke from him at last. She had never heard such words
from him, uttered in such a voice.

"H'm!" she growled in response.

_"Je vous aimais toute ma vie... vingt ans!"_

She remained silent for two or three minutes.

"And when you were getting yourself up for Dasha you sprinkled yourself
with scent," she said suddenly, in a terrible whisper.

Stepan Trofimovitch was dumbfounded.

"You put on a new tie..."

Again silence for two minutes.

"Do you remember the cigar?"

"My friend," he faltered, overcome with horror.

"That cigar at the window in the evening... the moon was shining...
after the arbour... at Skvoreshniki? Do you remember, do you remember?"
She jumped up from her place, seized his pillow by the corners and shook
it with his head on it. "Do you remember, you worthless, worthless,
ignoble, cowardly, worthless man, always worthless!" she hissed in her
furious whisper, restraining herself from speaking loudly. At last
she left him and sank on the chair, covering her face with her hands.
"Enough!" she snapped out, drawing herself up. "Twenty years have
passed, there's no calling them back. I am a fool too."

_"Je vous aimais."_ He clasped his hands again.

"Why do you keep on with your _aimais_ and _aimais_? Enough!" she cried,
leaping up again. "And if you don't go to sleep at once I'll... You need
rest; go to sleep, go to sleep at once, shut your eyes. Ach, mercy on
us, perhaps he wants some lunch! What do you eat? What does he eat? Ach,
mercy on us! Where is that woman? Where is she?"

There was a general bustle again. But Stepan Trofimovitch faltered in a
weak voice that he really would like to go to sleep _une heure,_ and then
_un bouillon, un thé.... enfin il est si heureux._ He lay back and really
did seem to go to sleep (he probably pretended to). Varvara Petrovna
waited a little, and stole out on tiptoe from behind the partition.

She settled herself in the landlady's room, turned out the landlady and
her husband, and told Dasha to bring her _that_ woman. There followed an
examination in earnest.

"Tell me all about it, my good girl. Sit down beside me; that's right.
Well?"

"I met Stepan Trofimovitch..."

"Stay, hold your tongue! I warn you that if you tell lies or conceal
anything, I'll ferret it out. Well?"

"Stepan Trofimovitch and I... as soon as I came to Hatovo..." Sofya
Matveyevna began almost breathlessly.

"Stay, hold your tongue, wait a bit! Why do you gabble like that? To
begin with, what sort of creature are you?"

Sofya Matveyevna told her after a fashion, giving a very brief account
of herself, however, beginning with Sevastopol. Varvara Petrovna
listened in silence, sitting up erect in her chair, looking sternly
straight into the speaker's eyes.

"Why are you so frightened? Why do you look at the ground? I like people
who look me straight in the face and hold their own with me. Go on."

She told of their meeting, of her books, of how Stepan Trofimovitch had
regaled the peasant woman with vodka... "That's right, that's right,
don't leave out the slightest detail," Varvara Petrovna encouraged her.

At last she described how they had set off, and how Stepan Trofimovitch
had gone on talking, "really ill by that time," and here had given an
account of his life from the very beginning, talking for some hours.
"Tell me about his life."

Sofya Matveyevna suddenly stopped and was completely nonplussed.

"I can't tell you anything about that, madam," she brought out, almost
crying; "besides, I could hardly understand a word of it."

"Nonsense! You must have understood something."

"He told a long time about a distinguished lady with black hair." Sofya
Matveyevna flushed terribly though she noticed Varvara Petrovna's fair
hair and her complete dissimilarity with the "brunette" of the story.

"Black-haired? What exactly? Come, speak!"

"How this grand lady was deeply in love with his honour all her life
long and for twenty years, but never dared to speak, and was shamefaced
before him because she was a very stout lady...."

"The fool!" Varvara Petrovna rapped out thoughtfully but resolutely.

Sofya Matveyevna was in tears by now.

"I don't know how to tell any of it properly, madam, because I was in a
great fright over his honour; and I couldn't understand, as he is such
an intellectual gentleman."

"It's not for a goose like you to judge of his intellect. Did he offer
you his hand?"

The speaker trembled.

"Did he fall in love with you? Speak! Did he offer you his hand?"
Varvara Petrovna shouted peremptorily.

"That was pretty much how it was," she murmured tearfully. "But I took
it all to mean nothing, because of his illness," she added firmly,
raising her eyes.

"What is your name?"

"Sofya Matveyevna, madam."

"Well, then, let me tell you, Sofya Matveyevna, that he is a wretched
and worthless little man.... Good Lord! Do you look upon me as a wicked
woman?"

Sofya Matveyevna gazed open-eyed.

"A wicked woman, a tyrant? Who has ruined his life?"

"How can that be when you are crying yourself, madam?"

Varvara Petrovna actually had tears in her eyes.

"Well, sit down, sit down, don't be frightened. Look me straight in the
face again. Why are you blushing? Dasha, come here. Look at her. What do
you think of her? Her heart is pure...."

And to the amazement and perhaps still greater alarm of Sofya
Matveyevna, she suddenly patted her on the cheek.

"It's only a pity she is a fool. Too great a fool for her age. That's
all right, my dear, I'll look after you. I see that it's all nonsense.
Stay near here for the time. A room shall be taken for you and you shall
have food and everything else from me... till I ask for you."

Sofya Matveyevna stammered in alarm that she must hurry on.

"You've no need to hurry. I'll buy all your books, and meantime you stay
here. Hold your tongue; don't make excuses. If I hadn't come you would
have stayed with him all the same, wouldn't you?"

"I wouldn't have left him on any account," Sofya Matveyevna brought out
softly and firmly, wiping her tears.

It was late at night when Doctor Salzfish was brought. He was a very
respectable old man and a practitioner of fairly wide experience who had
recently lost his post in the service in consequence of some quarrel
on a point of honour with his superiors. Varvara Petrovna instantly
and actively took him under her protection. He examined the patient
attentively, questioned him, and cautiously pronounced to Varvara
Petrovna that "the sufferer's" condition was highly dubious in
consequence of complications, and that they must be prepared "even for
the worst." Varvara Petrovna, who had during twenty years got
accustomed to expecting nothing serious or decisive to come from Stepan
Trofimovitch, was deeply moved and even turned pale. "Is there really no
hope?"

"Can there ever be said to be absolutely no hope? But..." She did not go
to bed all night, and felt that the morning would never come. As soon
as the patient opened his eyes and returned to consciousness (he was
conscious all the time, however, though he was growing weaker every
hour), she went up to him with a very resolute air.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, one must be prepared for anything. I've sent for a
priest. You must do what is right...."

Knowing his convictions, she was terribly afraid of his refusing. He
looked at her with surprise.

"Nonsense, nonsense!" she vociferated, thinking he was already refusing.
"This is no time for whims. You have played the fool enough."

"But... am I really so ill, then?"

He agreed thoughtfully. And indeed I was much surprised to learn from
Varvara Petrovna afterwards that he showed no fear of death at all.
Possibly it was that he simply did not believe it, and still looked upon
his illness as a trifling one.

He confessed and took the sacrament very readily. Every one, Sofya
Matveyevna, and even the servants, came to congratulate him on taking
the sacrament. They were all moved to tears looking at his sunken and
exhausted face and his blanched and quivering lips.

"_Oui, mes amis,_ and I only wonder that you... take so much trouble. I
shall most likely get up to-morrow, and we will... set off.... _Toute
cette cérémonie_... for which, of course, I feel every proper respect...
was..."

"I beg you, father, to remain with the invalid," said Varvara Petrovna
hurriedly, stopping the priest, who had already taken off his vestments.
"As soon as tea has been handed, I beg you to begin to speak of
religion, to support his faith."

The priest spoke; every one was standing or sitting round the sick-bed.

"In our sinful days," the priest began smoothly, with a cup of tea in
his hand, "faith in the Most High is the sole refuge of the race of man
in all the trials and tribulations of life, as well as its hope for that
eternal bliss promised to the righteous."

Stepan Trofimovitch seemed to revive, a subtle smile strayed on his
lips.

_"Mon père, je vous remercie et vous êtes bien bon, mais..."_

"No _mais_ about it, no _mais_ at all!" exclaimed Varvara Petrovna,
bounding up from her chair. "Father," she said, addressing the priest,
"he is a man who... he is a man who... You will have to confess him
again in another hour! That's the sort of man he is."

Stepan Trofimovitch smiled faintly.

"My friends," he said, "God is necessary to me, if only because He is
the only being whom one can love eternally."

Whether he was really converted, or whether the stately ceremony of
the administration of the sacrament had impressed him and stirred the
artistic responsiveness of his temperament or not, he firmly and, I
am told, with great feeling uttered some words which were in flat
contradiction with many of his former convictions.

"My immortality is necessary if only because God will not be guilty
of injustice and extinguish altogether the flame of love for Him once
kindled in my heart. And what is more precious than love? Love is higher
than existence, love is the crown of existence; and how is it possible
that existence should not be under its dominance? If I have once loved
Him and rejoiced in my love, is it possible that He should extinguish me
and my joy and bring me to nothingness again? If there is a God, then I
am immortal. _Voilà ma profession de foi._"

"There is a God, Stepan Trofimovitch, I assure you there is," Varvara
Petrovna implored him. "Give it up, drop all your foolishness for once
in your life!" (I think she had not quite understood his _profession de
foi_.)

"My friend," he said, growing more and more animated, though his voice
broke frequently, "as soon as I understood... that turning of the cheek,
I... understood something else as well. _J'ai menti toute ma vie,_ all my
life, all! I should like... but that will do to-morrow.... To-morrow we
will all set out."

Varvara Petrovna burst into tears. He was looking about for some one.

"Here she is, she is here!" She seized Sofya Matveyevna by the hand and
led her to him. He smiled tenderly.

"Oh, I should dearly like to live again!" he exclaimed with an
extraordinary rush of energy. "Every minute, every instant of life ought
to be a blessing to man... they ought to be, they certainly ought to be!
It's the duty of man to make it so; that's the law of his nature, which
always exists even if hidden.... Oh, I wish I could see Petrusha... and
all of them... Shatov..."

I may remark that as yet no one had heard of Shatov's fate--not Varvara
Petrovna nor Darya Pavlovna, nor even Salzfish, who was the last to come
from the town.

Stepan Trofimovitch became more and more excited, feverishly so, beyond
his strength.

"The mere fact of the ever present idea that there exists something
infinitely more just and more happy than I am fills me through and
through with tender ecstasy--and glorifies me--oh, whoever I may be,
whatever I have done! What is far more essential for man than personal
happiness is to know and to believe at every instant that there is
somewhere a perfect and serene happiness for all men and for
everything.... The one essential condition of human existence is that
man should always be able to bow down before something infinitely great.
If men are deprived of the infinitely great they will not go on living
and will die of despair. The Infinite and the Eternal are as essential
for man as the little planet on which he dwells. My friends, all, all:
hail to the Great Idea! The Eternal, Infinite Idea! It is essential to
every man, whoever he may be, to bow down before what is the Great Idea.
Even the stupidest man needs something great. Petrusha... oh, how I want
to see them all again! They don't know, they don't know that that same
Eternal, Grand Idea lies in them all!"

Doctor Salzfish was not present at the ceremony. Coming in suddenly, he
was horrified, and cleared the room, insisting that the patient must not
be excited.

Stepan Trofimovitch died three days later, but by that time he was
completely unconscious. He quietly went out like a candle that is burnt
down. After having the funeral service performed, Varvara Petrovna
took the body of her poor friend to Skvoreshniki. His grave is in the
precincts of the church and is already covered with a marble slab. The
inscription and the railing will be added in the spring.

Varvara Petrovna's absence from town had lasted eight days. Sofya
Matveyevna arrived in the carriage with her and seems to have settled
with her for good. I may mention that as soon as Stepan Trofimovitch
lost consciousness (the morning that he received the sacrament) Varvara
Petrovna promptly asked Sofya Matveyevna to leave the cottage again, and
waited on the invalid herself unassisted to the end, but she sent for
her at once when he had breathed his last. Sofya Matveyevna was terribly
alarmed by Varvara Petrovna's proposition, or rather command, that she
should settle for good at Skvoreshniki, but the latter refused to listen
to her protests.

"That's all nonsense! I will go with you to sell the gospel. I have no
one in the world now."

"You have a son, however," Salzfish observed.

"I have no son!" Varvara Petrovna snapped out--and it was like a
prophecy.




CHAPTER VIII. CONCLUSION

ALL THE CRIMES AND VILLAINIES THAT had been perpetrated were discovered
with extraordinary rapidity, much more quickly than Pyotr Stepanovitch
had expected. To begin with, the luckless Marya Ignatyevna waked up
before daybreak on the night of her husband's murder, missed him and
flew into indescribable agitation, not seeing him beside her. The woman
who had been hired by Anna Prohorovna, and was there for the night,
could not succeed in calming her, and as soon as it was daylight ran
to fetch Arina Prohorovna herself, assuring the invalid that the latter
knew where her husband was, and when he would be back. Meantime Arina
Prohorovna was in some anxiety too; she had already heard from her
husband of the deed perpetrated that night at Skvoreshniki. He had
returned home about eleven o'clock in a terrible state of mind and
body; wringing his hands, he flung himself face downwards on his bed and
shaking with convulsive sobs kept repeating, "It's not right, it's not
right, it's not right at all!" He ended, of course, by confessing it all
to Arina Prohorovna--but to no one else in the house. She left him on
his bed, sternly impressing upon him that "if he must blubber he must do
it in his pillow so as not to be overheard, and that he would be a fool
if he showed any traces of it next day." She felt somewhat anxious,
however, and began at once to clear things up in case of emergency;
she succeeded in hiding or completely destroying all suspicious papers,
books, manifestoes perhaps. At the same time she reflected that she, her
sister, her aunt, her sister-in-law the student, and perhaps even her
long-eared brother had really nothing much to be afraid of. When the
nurse ran to her in the morning she went without a second thought to
Marya Ignatyevna's. She was desperately anxious, moreover, to find out
whether what her husband had told her that night in a terrified and
frantic whisper, that was almost like delirium, was true--that is,
whether Pyotr Stepanovitch had been right in his reckoning that Kirillov
would sacrifice himself for the general benefit.

But she arrived at Marya Ignatyevna's too late: when the latter had sent
off the woman and was left alone, she was unable to bear the suspense;
she got out of bed, and throwing round her the first garment she could
find, something very light and unsuitable for the weather, I believe,
she ran down to Kirillov's lodge herself, thinking that he perhaps would
be better able than anyone to tell her something about her husband. The
terrible effect on her of what she saw there may well be imagined. It
is remarkable that she did not read Kirillov's last letter, which lay
conspicuously on the table, overlooking it, of course, in her fright.
She ran back to her room, snatched up her baby, and went with it out of
the house into the street. It was a damp morning, there was a fog.
She met no passers-by in such an out-of-the-way street. She ran on
breathless through the wet, cold mud, and at last began knocking at the
doors of the houses. In the first house no one came to the door, in the
second they were so long in coming that she gave it up impatiently and
began knocking at a third door. This was the house of a merchant called
Titov. Here she wailed and kept declaring incoherently that her husband
was murdered, causing a great flutter in the house. Something was
known about Shatov and his story in the Titov household; they were
horror-stricken that she should be running about the streets in such
attire and in such cold with the baby scarcely covered in her arms,
when, according to her story, she had only been confined the day before.
They thought at first that she was delirious, especially as they could
not make out whether it was Kirillov who was murdered or her husband.
Seeing that they did not believe her she would have run on farther,
but they kept her by force, and I am told she screamed and struggled
terribly. They went to Filipov's, and within two hours Kirillov's
suicide and the letter he had left were known to the whole town. The
police came to question Marya Ignatyevna, who was still conscious, and
it appeared at once that she had not read Kirillov's letter, and they
could not find out from her what had led her to conclude that her
husband had been murdered. She only screamed that if Kirillov was
murdered, then her husband was murdered, they were together. Towards
midday she sank into a state of unconsciousness from which she never
recovered, and she died three days later. The baby had caught cold and
died before her.

Arina Prohorovna not finding Marya Ignatyevna and the baby, and guessing
something was wrong, was about to run home, but she checked herself at
the gate and sent the nurse to inquire of the gentleman at the lodge
whether Marya Ignatyevna was not there and whether he knew anything
about her. The woman came back screaming frantically. Persuading her not
to scream and not to tell anyone by the time-honoured argument that "she
would get into trouble," she stole out of the yard.

It goes without saying that she was questioned the same morning as
having acted as midwife to Marya Ignatyevna; but they did not get much
out of her. She gave a very cool and sensible account of all she had
herself heard and seen at Shatov's, but as to what had happened she
declared that she knew nothing, and could not understand it.

It may well be imagined what an uproar there was in the town. A new
"sensation," another murder! But there was another element in this
case: it was clear that a secret society of murderers, incendiaries, and
revolutionists did exist, did actually exist. Liza's terrible death, the
murder of Stavrogin's wife, Stavrogin himself, the fire, the ball for
the benefit of the governesses, the laxity of manners and morals in
Yulia Mihailovna's circle.... Even in the disappearance of Stepan
Trofimovitch people insisted on scenting a mystery. All sorts of things
were whispered about Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. By the end of the day
people knew of Pyotr Stepanovitch's absence too, and, strange to say,
less was said of him than of anyone. What was talked of most all that
day was "the senator." There was a crowd almost all day at Filipov's
house. The police certainly were led astray by Kirillov's letter. They
believed that Kirillov had murdered Shatov and had himself committed
suicide. Yet, though the authorities were thrown into perplexity,
they were not altogether hoodwinked. The word "park," for instance, so
vaguely inserted in Kirillov's letter, did not puzzle anyone as Pyotr
Stepanovitch had expected it would. The police at once made a rush
for Skvoreshniki, not simply because it was the only park in the
neighbourhood but also led thither by a sort of instinct because all the
horrors of the last few days were connected directly or indirectly with
Skvoreshniki. That at least is my theory. (I may remark that
Varvara Petrovna had driven off early that morning in chase of Stepan
Trofimovitch, and knew nothing of what had happened in the town.)

The body was found in the pond that evening. What led to the discovery
of it was the finding of Shatov's cap at the scene of the murder, where
it had been with extraordinary carelessness overlooked by the murderers.
The appearance of the body, the medical examination and certain
deductions from it roused immediate suspicions that Kirillov must have
had accomplices. It became evident that a secret society really did
exist of which Shatov and Kirillov were members and which was connected
with the manifestoes. Who were these accomplices? No one even thought of
any member of the quintet that day. It was ascertained that Kirillov
had lived like a hermit, and in so complete a seclusion that it had been
possible, as stated in the letter, for Fedka to lodge with him for so
many days, even while an active search was being made for him. The chief
thing that worried every one was the impossibility of discovering a
connecting-link in this chaos.

There is no saying what conclusions and what disconnected theories our
panic-stricken townspeople would have reached, if the whole mystery had
not been suddenly solved next day, thanks to Lyamshin.

He broke down. He behaved as even Pyotr Stepanovitch had towards the end
begun to fear he would. Left in charge of Tolkatchenko, and afterwards
of Erkel, he spent all the following day lying in his bed with his face
turned to the wall, apparently calm, not uttering a word, and scarcely
answering when he was spoken to. This is how it was that he heard
nothing all day of what was happening in the town. But Tolkatchenko,
who was very well informed about everything, took into his head by
the evening to throw up the task of watching Lyamshin which Pyotr
Stepanovitch had laid upon him, and left the town, that is, to put it
plainly, made his escape; the fact is, they lost their heads as Erkel
had predicted they would. I may mention, by the way, that Liputin had
disappeared the same day before twelve o'clock. But things fell out so
that his disappearance did not become known to the authorities till
the evening of the following day, when, the police went to question his
family, who were panic-stricken at his absence but kept quiet from fear
of consequences. But to return to Lyamshin: as soon as he was left alone
(Erkel had gone home earlier, relying on Tolkatchenko) he ran out of
his house, and, of course, very soon learned the position of affairs.
Without even returning home he too tried to run away without knowing
where he was going. But the night was so dark and to escape was so
terrible and difficult, that after going through two or three streets,
he returned home and locked himself up for the whole night. I believe
that towards morning he attempted to commit suicide but did not succeed.
He remained locked up till midday--and then suddenly he ran to the
authorities. He is said to have crawled on his knees, to have sobbed and
shrieked, to have kissed the floor crying out that he was not worthy to
kiss the boots of the officials standing before him. They soothed him,
were positively affable to him. His examination lasted, I am told, for
three hours. He confessed everything, everything, told every detail,
everything he knew, every point, anticipating their questions, hurried
to make a clean breast of it all, volunteering unnecessary information
without being asked. It turned out that he knew enough, and presented
things in a fairly true light: the tragedy of Shatov and Kirillov, the
fire, the death of the Lebyadkins, and the rest of it were relegated
to the background. Pyotr Stepanovitch, the secret society, the
organisation, and the network were put in the first place. When asked
what was the object of so many murders and scandals and dastardly
outrages, he answered with feverish haste that "it was with the idea of
systematically undermining the foundations, systematically destroying
society and all principles; with the idea of nonplussing every one and
making hay of everything, and then, when society was tottering, sick
and out of joint, cynical and sceptical though filled with an intense
eagerness for self-preservation and for some guiding idea, suddenly to
seize it in their hands, raising the standard of revolt and relying on a
complete network of quintets, which were actively, meanwhile, gathering
recruits and seeking out the weak spots which could be attacked."
In conclusion, he said that here in our town Pyotr Stepanovitch had
organised only the first experiment in such systematic disorder, so to
speak as a programme for further activity, and for all the quintets--and
that this was his own (Lyamshin's) idea, his own theory, "and that he
hoped they would remember it and bear in mind how openly and properly
he had given his information, and therefore might be of use hereafter."
Being asked definitely how many quintets there were, he answered that
there were immense numbers of them, that all Russia was overspread with
a network, and although he brought forward no proofs, I believe his
answer was perfectly sincere. He produced only the programme of the
society, printed abroad, and the plan for developing a system of future
activity roughly sketched in Pyotr Stepanovitch's own handwriting. It
appeared that Lyamshin had quoted the phrase about "undermining the
foundation," word for word from this document, not omitting a single
stop or comma, though he had declared that it was all his own theory.
Of Yulia Mihailovna he very funnily and quite without provocation
volunteered the remark, that "she was innocent and had been made a
fool of." But, strange to say, he exonerated Nikolay Stavrogin from
all share in the secret society, from any collaboration with Pyotr
Stepanovitch. (Lyamshin had no conception of the secret and very absurd
hopes that Pyotr Stepanovitch was resting on Stavrogin.) According to
his story Nikolay Stavrogin had nothing whatever to do with the death of
the Lebyadkins, which had been planned by Pyotr Stepanovitch alone
and with the subtle aim of implicating the former in the crime, and
therefore making him dependent on Pyotr Stepanovitch; but instead of
the gratitude on which Pyotr Stepanovitch had reckoned with shallow
confidence, he had roused nothing but indignation and even despair in
"the generous heart of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch." He wound up, by a hint,
evidently intentional, volunteered hastily, that Stavrogin was perhaps
a very important personage, but that there was some secret about that,
that he had been living among us, so to say, incognito, that he had some
commission, and that very possibly he would come back to us again
from Petersburg. (Lyamshin was convinced that Stavrogin had gone
to Petersburg), but in quite a different capacity and in different
surroundings, in the suite of persons of whom perhaps we should soon
hear, and that all this he had heard from Pyotr Stepanovitch, "Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch's secret enemy."

Here I will note that two months later, Lyamshin admitted that he had
exonerated Stavrogin on purpose, hoping that he would protect him and
would obtain for him a mitigation in the second degree of his sentence,
and that he would provide him with money and letters of introduction
in Siberia. From this confession it is evident that he had an
extraordinarily exaggerated conception of Stavrogin's powers.

On the same day, of course, the police arrested Virginsky and in their
zeal took his whole family too. (Arina Prohorovna, her sister, aunt, and
even the girl student were released long ago; they say that Shigalov too
will be set free very shortly because he cannot be classed with any of
the other prisoners. But all that is so far only gossip.) Virginsky at
once pleaded guilty. He was lying ill with fever when he was arrested.
I am told that he seemed almost relieved; "it was a load off his heart,"
he is reported to have said. It is rumoured that he is giving his
evidence without reservation, but with a certain dignity, and has not
given up any of his "bright hopes," though at the same time he curses
the political method (as opposed to the Socialist one), in which he
had been unwittingly and heedlessly carried "by the vortex of combined
circumstances." His conduct at the time of the murder has been put in
a favourable light, and I imagine that he too may reckon on some
mitigation of his sentence. That at least is what is asserted in the
town.

But I doubt whether there is any hope for mercy in Erkel's case. Ever
since his arrest he has been obstinately silent, or has misrepresented
the facts as far as he could. Not one word of regret has been wrung
from him so far. Yet even the sternest of the judges trying him has
been moved to some compassion by his youth, by his helplessness, by the
unmistakable evidence that he is nothing but a fanatical victim of a
political impostor, and, most of all, by his conduct to his mother,
to whom, as it appears, he used to send almost the half of his small
salary. His mother is now in the town; she is a delicate and ailing
woman, aged beyond her years; she weeps and positively grovels on the
ground imploring mercy for her son. Whatever may happen, many among us
feel sorry for Erkel.

Liputin was arrested in Petersburg, where he had been living for a
fortnight. His conduct there sounds almost incredible and is difficult
to explain. He is said to have had a passport in a forged name and quite
a large sum of money upon him, and had every possibility of escaping
abroad, yet instead of going he remained in Petersburg. He spent some
time hunting for Stavrogin and Pyotr Stepanovitch. Suddenly he took to
drinking and gave himself up to a debauchery that exceeded all bounds,
like a man who had lost all reason and understanding of his position. He
was arrested in Petersburg drunk in a brothel. There is a rumour that he
has not by any means lost heart, that he tells lies in his evidence and
is preparing for the approaching trial hopefully (?) and, as it
were, triumphantly. He even intends to make a speech at the trial.
Tolkatchenko, who was arrested in the neighbourhood ten days after his
flight, behaves with incomparably more decorum; he does not shuffle
or tell lies, he tells all he knows, does not justify himself, blames
himself with all modesty, though he, too, has a weakness for rhetoric;
he tells readily what he knows, and when knowledge of the peasantry and
the revolutionary elements among them is touched upon, he positively
attitudinises and is eager to produce an effect. He, too, is meaning, I
am told, to make a speech at the trial. Neither he nor Liputin seem very
much afraid, curious as it seems.

I repeat that the case is not yet over. Now, three months afterwards,
local society has had time to rest, has recovered, has got over it, has
an opinion of its own, so much so that some people positively look
upon Pyotr Stepanovitch as a genius or at least as possessed of "some
characteristics of a genius." "Organisation!" they say at the club,
holding up a finger. But all this is very innocent and there are not
many people who talk like that. Others, on the other hand, do not deny
his acuteness, but point out that he was utterly ignorant of real life,
that he was terribly theoretical, grotesquely and stupidly one-sided,
and consequently shallow in the extreme. As for his moral qualities all
are agreed; about that there are no two opinions.

I do not know whom to mention next so as not to forget anyone. Mavriky
Nikolaevitch has gone away for good, I don't know where. Old Madame
Drozdov has sunk into dotage.... I have still one very gloomy story to
tell, however. I will confine myself to the bare facts.

On her return from Ustyevo, Varvara Petrovna stayed at her town house.
All the accumulated news broke upon her at once and gave her a terrible
shock. She shut herself up alone. It was evening; every one was tired
and went to bed early.

In the morning a maid with a mysterious air handed a note to Darya
Pavlovna. The note had, so she said, arrived the evening before, but
late, when all had gone to bed, so that she had not ventured to wake
her. It had not come by post, but had been put in Alexey Yegorytch's
hand in Skvoreshniki by some unknown person. And Alexey Yegorytch had
immediately set off and put it into her hands himself and had then
returned to Skvoreshniki.

For a long while Darya Pavlovna gazed at the letter with a beating
heart, and dared not open it. She knew from whom it came: the writer was
Nikolay Stavrogin. She read what was written on the envelope: "To Alexey
Yegorytch, to be given secretly to Darya Pavlovna."

Here is the letter word for word, without the slightest correction of
the defects in style of a Russian aristocrat who had never mastered the
Russian grammar in spite of his European education.

"Dear Darya Pavlovna,--At one time you expressed a wish to be my nurse
and made me promise to send for you when I wanted you. I am going away
in two days and shall not come back. Will you go with me?

"Last year, like Herzen, I was naturalised as a citizen of the canton
of Uri, and that nobody knows. There I've already bought a little house.
I've still twelve thousand roubles left; we'll go and live there for
ever. I don't want to go anywhere else ever.

"It's a very dull place, a narrow valley, the mountains restrict both
vision and thought. It's very gloomy. I chose the place because there
was a little house to be sold. If you don't like it I'll sell it and buy
another in some other place.

"I am not well, but I hope to get rid of hallucinations in that air.
It's physical, and as for the moral you know everything; but do you know
all?

"I've told you a great deal of my life, but not all. Even to you!
Not all. By the way, I repeat that in my conscience I feel myself
responsible for my wife's death. I haven't seen you since then, that's
why I repeat it. I feel guilty about Lizaveta Nikolaevna too; but you
know about that; you foretold almost all that.

"Better not come to me. My asking you to is a horrible meanness. And why
should you bury your life with me? You are dear to me, and when I was
miserable it was good to be beside you; only with you I could speak
of myself aloud. But that proves nothing. You defined it yourself, 'a
nurse'--it's your own expression; why sacrifice so much? Grasp this,
too, that I have no pity for you since I ask you, and no respect for
you since I reckon on you. And yet I ask you and I reckon on you. In
any case I need your answer for I must set off very soon. In that case I
shall go alone.

"I expect nothing of Uri; I am simply going. I have not chosen a gloomy
place on purpose. I have no ties in Russia--everything is as alien to
me there as everywhere. It's true that I dislike living there more than
anywhere; but I can't hate anything even there!

"I've tried my strength everywhere. You advised me to do this 'that I
might learn to know myself.' As long as I was experimenting for myself
and for others it seemed infinite, as it has all my life. Before your
eyes I endured a blow from your brother; I acknowledged my marriage in
public. But to what to apply my strength, that is what I've never seen,
and do not see now in spite of all your praises in Switzerland, which
I believed in. I am still capable, as I always was, of desiring to do
something good, and of feeling pleasure from it; at the same time I
desire evil and feel pleasure from that too. But both feelings are
always too petty, and are never very strong. My desires are too weak;
they are not enough to guide me. On a log one may cross a river but not
on a chip. I say this that you may not believe that I am going to Uri
with hopes of any sort.

"As always I blame no one. I've tried the depths of debauchery and
wasted my strength over it. But I don't like vice and I didn't want it.
You have been watching me of late. Do you know that I looked upon our
iconoclasts with spite, from envy of their hopes? But you had no need to
be afraid. I could not have been one of them for I never shared anything
with them. And to do it for fun, from spite I could not either, not
because I am afraid of the ridiculous--I cannot be afraid of the
ridiculous--but because I have, after all, the habits of a gentleman and
it disgusted me. But if I had felt more spite and envy of them I might
perhaps have joined them. You can judge how hard it has been for me, and
how I've struggled from one thing to another.

"Dear friend! Great and tender heart which I divined! Perhaps you dream
of giving me so much love and lavishing on me so much that is beautiful
from your beautiful soul, that you hope to set up some aim for me at
last by it? No, it's better for you to be more cautious, my love will
be as petty as I am myself and you will be unhappy. Your brother told me
that the man who loses connection with his country loses his gods, that
is, all his aims. One may argue about everything endlessly, but from me
nothing has come but negation, with no greatness of soul, no force.
Even negation has not come from me. Everything has always been petty and
spiritless. Kirillov, in the greatness of his soul, could not compromise
with an idea, and shot himself; but I see, of course, that he was
great-souled because he had lost his reason. I can never lose my reason,
and I can never believe in an idea to such a degree as he did. I cannot
even be interested in an idea to such a degree. I can never, never shoot
myself.

"I know I ought to kill myself, to brush myself off the earth like a
nasty insect; but I am afraid of suicide, for I am afraid of showing
greatness of soul. I know that it will be another sham again--the last
deception in an endless series of deceptions. What good is there in
deceiving oneself? Simply to play at greatness of soul? Indignation and
shame I can never feel, therefore not despair.

"Forgive me for writing so much. I wrote without noticing. A hundred
pages would be too little and ten lines would be enough. Ten lines would
be enough to ask you to be a nurse. Since I left Skvoreshniki I've been
living at the sixth station on the line, at the stationmaster's. I got
to know him in the time of debauchery five years ago in Petersburg. No
one knows I am living there. Write to him. I enclose the address.

"Nikolay Stavrogin."

Darya Pavlovna went at once and showed the letter to Varvara Petrovna.
She read it and asked Dasha to go out of the room so that she might read
it again alone; but she called her back very quickly.

"Are you going?" she asked almost timidly.

"I am going," answered Dasha.

"Get ready! We'll go together."

Dasha looked at her inquiringly.

"What is there left for me to do here? What difficulty will it make?
I'll be naturalised in Uri, too, and live in the valley.... Don't be
uneasy, I won't be in the way."

They began packing quickly to be in time to catch the midday train.
But in less than half an hour's time Alexey Yegorytch arrived from
Skvoreshniki. He announced that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had suddenly
arrived that morning by the early train, and was now at Skvoreshniki but
"in such a state that his honour did not answer any questions, walked
through all the rooms and shut himself up in his own wing...."

"Though I received no orders I thought it best to come and inform you,"
Alexey Yegorytch concluded with a very significant expression.

Varvara Petrovna looked at him searchingly and did not question him. The
carriage was got ready instantly. Varvara Petrovna set off with Dasha.
They say that she kept crossing herself on the journey.

In Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's wing of the house all the doors were open
and he was nowhere to be seen.

"Wouldn't he be upstairs?" Fomushka ventured.

It was remarkable that several servants followed Varvara Petrovna while
the others all stood waiting in the drawing-room. They would never have
dared to commit such a breach of etiquette before. Varvara Petrovna saw
it and said nothing.

They went upstairs. There there were three rooms; but they found no one
there.

"Wouldn't his honour have gone up there?" some one suggested, pointing
to the door of the loft. And in-fact, the door of the loft which was
always closed had been opened and was standing ajar. The loft was right
under the roof and was reached by a long, very steep and narrow wooden
ladder. There was a sort of little room up there too.

"I am not going up there. Why should he go up there?" said Varvara
Petrovna, turning terribly pale as she looked at the servants. They
gazed back at her and said nothing. Dasha was trembling.

Varvara Petrovna rushed up the ladder; Dasha followed, but she had
hardly entered the loft when she uttered a scream and fell senseless.

The citizen of the canton of Uri was hanging there behind the door. On
the table lay a piece of paper with the words in pencil: "No one is to
blame, I did it myself." Beside it on the table lay a hammer, a piece
of soap, and a large nail--obviously an extra one in case of need. The
strong silk cord upon which Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had hanged himself
had evidently been chosen and prepared beforehand and was thickly
smeared with soap. Everything proved that there had been premeditation
and consciousness up to the last moment.

At the inquest our doctors absolutely and emphatically rejected all idea
of insanity.

THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Possessed, by Fyodor Dostoevsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POSSESSED ***

***** This file should be named 8117-8.txt or 8117-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/1/1/8117/

Produced by David Moynihan, David Widger and Michelle Knight

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
