
"Alas! We could do nothing but assent. We applauded our teacher and with
what warmth, indeed! And, after all, my friends, don't we still hear
to-day, every hour, at every step, the same "charming," "clever,"
"liberal," old Russian nonsense? Our teacher believed in God.

"I can't understand why they make me out an infidel here," he used to
say sometimes. "I believe in God, _mais distinguons_, I believe in Him as
a Being who is conscious of Himself in me only. I cannot believe as my
Nastasya (the servant) or like some country gentleman who believes 'to
be on the safe side,' or like our dear Shatov--but no, Shatov doesn't
come into it. Shatov believes 'on principle,' like a Moscow Slavophil.
As for Christianity, for all my genuine respect for it, I'm not a
Christian. I am more of an antique pagan, like the great Goethe, or
like an ancient Greek. The very fact that Christianity has failed to
understand woman is enough, as George Sand has so splendidly shown in
one of her great novels. As for the bowings, fasting and all the rest
of it, I don't understand what they have to do with me. However busy the
informers may be here, I don't care to become a Jesuit. In the year 1847
Byelinsky, who was abroad, sent his famous letter to Gogol, and warmly
reproached him for believing in some sort of God. _Entre nous soit dit,_ I
can imagine nothing more comic than the moment when Gogol (the Gogol of
that period!) read that phrase, and... the whole letter! But dismissing
the humorous aspect, and, as I am fundamentally in agreement, I point to
them and say--these were men! They knew how to love their people, they
knew how to suffer for them, they knew how to sacrifice everything for
them, yet they knew how to differ from them when they ought, and did not
filch certain ideas from them. Could Byelinsky have sought salvation
in Lenten oil, or peas with radish!..." But at this point Shatov
interposed.

"Those men of yours never loved the people, they didn't suffer for them,
and didn't sacrifice anything for them, though they may have amused
themselves by imagining it!" he growled sullenly, looking down, and
moving impatiently in his chair.

"They didn't love the people!" yelled Stepan Trofimovitch. "Oh, how they
loved Russia!"

"Neither Russia nor the people!" Shatov yelled too, with flashing eyes.
"You can't love what you don't know and they had no conception of the
Russian people. All of them peered at the Russian people through their
fingers, and you do too; Byelinsky especially: from that very letter to
Gogol one can see it. Byelinsky, like the Inquisitive Man in Krylov's
fable, did not notice the elephant in the museum of curiosities, but
concentrated his whole attention on the French Socialist beetles; he did
not get beyond them. And yet perhaps he was cleverer than any of you.
You've not only overlooked the people, you've taken up an attitude of
disgusting contempt for them, if only because you could not imagine any
but the French people, the Parisians indeed, and were ashamed that the
Russians were not like them. That's the naked truth. And he who has
no people has no God. You may be sure that all who cease to understand
their own people and lose their connection with them at once lose to
the same extent the faith of their fathers, and become atheistic or
indifferent. I'm speaking the truth! This is a fact which will be
realised. That's why all of you and all of us now are either beastly
atheists or careless, dissolute imbeciles, and nothing more. And you
too, Stepan Trofimovitch, I don't make an exception of you at all! In
fact, it is on your account I am speaking, let me tell you that!"

As a rule, after uttering such monologues (which happened to him pretty
frequently) Shatov snatched up his cap and rushed to the door, in the
full conviction that everything was now over, and that he had cut short
all friendly relations with Stepan Trofimovitch for ever. But the latter
always succeeded in stopping him in time.

"Hadn't we better make it up, Shatov, after all these endearments," he
would say, benignly holding out his hand to him from his arm-chair.

Shatov, clumsy and bashful, disliked sentimentality. Externally he was
rough, but inwardly, I believe, he had great delicacy. Although he often
went too far, he was the first to suffer for it. Muttering something
between his teeth in response to Stepan Trofimovitch's appeal, and
shuffling with his feet like a bear, he gave a sudden and unexpected
smile, put down his cap, and sat down in the same chair as before, with
his eyes stubbornly fixed on the ground. Wine was, of course, brought
in, and Stepan Trofimovitch proposed some suitable toast, for instance
the memory of some leading man of the past.




CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.


THERE WAS ANOTHER being in the world to whom Varvara Petrovna was as
much attached as she was to Stepan Trofimovitch, her only son, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch Stavrogin. It was to undertake his education that Stepan
Trofimovitch had been engaged. The boy was at that time eight years old,
and his frivolous father, General Stavrogin, was already living apart
from Varvara Petrovna, so that the child grew up entirely in his
mother's care. To do Stepan Trofimovitch justice, he knew how to win his
pupil's heart. The whole secret of this lay in the fact that he was a
child himself. I was not there in those days, and he continually felt
the want of a real friend. He did not hesitate to make a friend of this
little creature as soon as he had grown a little older. It somehow came
to pass quite naturally that there seemed to be no discrepancy of age
between them. More than once he awaked his ten- or eleven-year-old
friend at night, simply to pour out his wounded feelings and weep before
him, or to tell him some family secret, without realising that this was
an outrageous proceeding. They threw themselves into each other's arms
and wept. The boy knew that his mother loved him very much, but I doubt
whether he cared much for her. She talked little to him and did not
often interfere with him, but he was always morbidly conscious of her
intent, searching eyes fixed upon him. Yet the mother confided his whole
instruction and moral education to Stepan Trofimovitch. At that time her
faith in him was unshaken. One can't help believing that the tutor had
rather a bad influence on his pupil's nerves. When at sixteen he was
taken to a lyceum he was fragile-looking and pale, strangely quiet and
dreamy. (Later on he was distinguished by great physical strength.)
One must assume too that the friends went on weeping at night, throwing
themselves in each other's arms, though their tears were not always due
to domestic difficulties. Stepan Trofimovitch succeeded in reaching
the deepest chords in his pupil's heart, and had aroused in him a vague
sensation of that eternal, sacred yearning which some elect souls can
never give up for cheap gratification when once they have tasted and
known it. (There are some connoisseurs who prize this yearning more than
the most complete satisfaction of it, if such were possible.) But in any
case it was just as well that the pupil and the preceptor were, though
none too soon, parted.

For the first two years the lad used to come home from the lyceum
for the holidays. While Varvara Petrovna and Stepan Trofimovitch were
staying in Petersburg he was sometimes present at the literary evenings
at his mother's, he listened and looked on. He spoke little, and was
quiet and shy as before. His manner to Stepan Trofimovitch was as
affectionately attentive as ever, but there was a shade of reserve in
it. He unmistakably avoided distressing, lofty subjects or reminiscences
of the past. By his mother's wish he entered the army on completing
the school course, and soon received a commission in one of the most
brilliant regiments of the Horse Guards. He did not come to show himself
to his mother in his uniform, and his letters from Petersburg began to
be infrequent. Varvara Petrovna sent him money without stint, though
after the emancipation the revenue from her estate was so diminished
that at first her income was less than half what it had been before. She
had, however, a considerable sum laid by through years of economy.
She took great interest in her son's success in the highest Petersburg
society. Where she had failed, the wealthy young officer with
expectations succeeded. He renewed acquaintances which she had hardly
dared to dream of, and was welcomed everywhere with pleasure. But very
soon rather strange rumours reached Varvara Petrovna. The young man
had suddenly taken to riotous living with a sort of frenzy. Not that he
gambled or drank too much; there was only talk of savage recklessness,
of running over people in the street with his horses, of brutal conduct
to a lady of good society with whom he had a liaison and whom he
afterwards publicly insulted. There was a callous nastiness about this
affair. It was added, too, that he had developed into a regular bully,
insulting people for the mere pleasure of insulting them. Varvara
Petrovna was greatly agitated and distressed. Stepan Trofimovitch
assured her that this was only the first riotous effervescence of a too
richly endowed nature, that the storm would subside and that this was
only like the youth of Prince Harry, who caroused with Falstaff, Poins,
and Mrs. Quickly, as described by Shakespeare.

This time Varvara Petrovna did not cry out, "Nonsense, nonsense!" as she
was very apt to do in later years in response to Stepan Trofimovitch. On
the contrary she listened very eagerly, asked him to explain this theory
more exactly, took up Shakespeare herself and with great attention read
the immortal chronicle. But it did not comfort her, and indeed she did
not find the resemblance very striking. With feverish impatience she
awaited answers to some of her letters. She had not long to wait for
them. The fatal news soon reached her that "Prince Harry" had been
involved in two duels almost at once, was entirely to blame for both of
them, had killed one of his adversaries on the spot and had maimed the
other and was awaiting his trial in consequence. The case ended in his
being degraded to the ranks, deprived of the rights of a nobleman, and
transferred to an infantry line regiment, and he only escaped worse
punishment by special favour.

In 1863 he somehow succeeded in distinguishing himself; he received a
cross, was promoted to be a non-commissioned officer, and rose
rapidly to the rank of an officer. During this period Varvara Petrovna
despatched perhaps hundreds of letters to the capital, full of prayers
and supplications. She even stooped to some humiliation in this
extremity. After his promotion the young man suddenly resigned his
commission, but he did not come back to Skvoreshniki again, and gave up
writing to his mother altogether. They learned by roundabout means that
he was back in Petersburg, but that he was not to be met in the same
society as before; he seemed to be in hiding. They found out that he was
living in strange company, associating with the dregs of the population
of Petersburg, with slip-shod government clerks, discharged military
men, beggars of the higher class, and drunkards of all sorts--that he
visited their filthy families, spent days and nights in dark slums and
all sorts of low haunts, that he had sunk very low, that he was in rags,
and that apparently he liked it. He did not ask his mother for money,
he had his own little estate--once the property of his father, General
Stavrogin, which yielded at least some revenue, and which, it was
reported, he had let to a German from Saxony. At last his mother
besought him to come to her, and "Prince Harry" made his appearance
in our town. I had never set eyes him before, but now I got a very
distinct impression of him. He was a very handsome young man of
five-and-twenty, and I must own I was impressed by him. I had expected
to see a dirty ragamuffin, sodden with drink and debauchery. He was on
the contrary, the most elegant gentleman I had ever met, extremely well
dressed, with an air and manner only to be found in a man accustomed to
culture and refinement. I was not the only person surprised. It was a
surprise to all the townspeople to whom, of course, young Stavrogin's
whole biography was well known in its minutest details, though one could
not imagine how they had got hold of them, and, what was still more
surprising, half of their stories about him turned out to be true.

All our ladies were wild over the new visitor. They were sharply divided
into two parties, one of which adored him while the other half regarded
him with a hatred that was almost blood-thirsty: but both were crazy
about him. Some of them were particularly fascinated by the idea that he
had perhaps a fateful secret hidden in his soul; others were positively
delighted at the fact that he was a murderer. It appeared too that
he had had a very good education and was indeed a man of considerable
culture. No great acquirements were needed, of course, to astonish us.
But he could judge also of very interesting everyday affairs, and, what
was of the utmost value, he judged of them with remarkable good sense. I
must mention as a peculiar fact that almost from the first day we all of
us thought him a very sensible fellow. He was not very talkative, he was
elegant without exaggeration, surprisingly modest, and at the same time
bold and self-reliant, as none of us were. Our dandies gazed at him with
envy, and were completely eclipsed by him. His face, too, impressed me.
His hair was of a peculiarly intense black, his light-coloured eyes were
peculiarly light and calm, his complexion was peculiarly soft and white,
the red in his cheeks was too bright and clear, his teeth were like
pearls, and his lips like coral--one would have thought that he must
be a paragon of beauty, yet at the same time there seemed something
repellent about him. It was said that his face suggested a mask; so much
was said though, among other things they talked of his extraordinary
physical strength. He was rather tall. Varvara Petrovna looked at him
with pride, yet with continual uneasiness. He spent about six months
among us--listless, quiet, rather morose. He made his appearance in
society, and with unfailing propriety performed all the duties demanded
by our provincial etiquette. He was related, on his father's side, to
the governor, and was received by the latter as a near kinsman. But a
few months passed and the wild beast showed his claws.

I may observe by the way, in parenthesis, that Ivan Ossipovitch, our
dear mild governor, was rather like an old woman, though he was of good
family and highly connected--which explains the fact that he remained so
long among us, though he steadily avoided all the duties of his office.
From his munificence and hospitality he ought rather to have been a
marshal of nobility of the good old days than a governor in such busy
times as ours. It was always said in the town that it was not he, but
Varvara Petrovna who governed the province. Of course this was said
sarcastically; however, it was certainly a falsehood. And, indeed, much
wit was wasted on the subject among us. On the contrary, in later years,
Varvara Petrovna purposely and consciously withdrew from anything like
a position of authority, and, in spite of the extraordinary respect
in which she was held by the whole province, voluntarily confined her
influence within strict limits set up by herself. Instead of these
higher responsibilities she suddenly took up the management of her
estate, and, within two or three years, raised the revenue from it
almost to what it had yielded in the past. Giving up her former romantic
impulses (trips to Petersburg, plans for founding a magazine, and so
on) she began to be careful and to save money. She kept even Stepan
Trofimovitch at a distance, allowing him to take lodgings in another
house (a change for which he had long been worrying her under various
pretexts). Little by little Stepan Trofimovitch began to call her a
prosaic woman, or more jestingly, "My prosaic friend." I need hardly say
he only ventured on such jests in an extremely respectful form, and on
rare, and carefully chosen, occasions.

All of us in her intimate circle felt--Stepan Trofimovitch more acutely
than any of us--that her son had come to her almost, as it were, as a
new hope, and even as a sort of new aspiration. Her passion for her son
dated from the time of his successes in Petersburg society, and grew
more intense from the moment that he was degraded in the army. Yet she
was evidently afraid of him, and seemed like a slave in his presence.
It could be seen that she was afraid of something vague and mysterious
which she could not have put into words, and she often stole searching
glances at "Nicolas," scrutinising him reflectively... and behold--the
wild beast suddenly showed his claws.


II

Suddenly, apropos of nothing, our prince was guilty of incredible
outrages upon various persons and, what was most striking these outrages
were utterly unheard of, quite inconceivable, unlike anything commonly
done, utterly silly and mischievous, quite unprovoked and objectless.
One of the most respected of our club members, on our committee of
management, Pyotr Pavlovitch Gaganov, an elderly man of high rank in the
service, had formed the innocent habit of declaring vehemently on all
sorts of occasions: "No, you can't lead me by the nose!" Well, there
is no harm in that. But one day at the club, when he brought out this
phrase in connection with some heated discussion in the midst of a
little group of members (all persons of some consequence) Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, who was standing on one side, alone and unnoticed,
suddenly went up to Pyotr Pavlovitch, took him unexpectedly and firmly
with two fingers by the nose, and succeeded in leading him two or three
steps across the room. He could have had no grudge against Mr. Gaganov.
It might be thought to be a mere schoolboy prank, though, of course, a
most unpardonable one. Yet, describing it afterwards, people said that
he looked almost dreamy at the very instant of the operation, "as though
he had gone out of his mind," but that was recalled and reflected upon
long afterwards. In the excitement of the moment all they recalled was
the minute after, when he certainly saw it all as it really was, and far
from being confused smiled gaily and maliciously "without the slightest
regret." There was a terrific outcry; he was surrounded. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch kept turning round, looking about him, answering nobody,
and glancing curiously at the persons exclaiming around him. At last he
seemed suddenly, as it were, to sink into thought again--so at least it
was reported--frowned, went firmly up to the affronted Pyotr Pavlovitch,
and with evident vexation said in a rapid mutter:

"You must forgive me, of course... I really don't know what suddenly
came over me... it's silly."

The carelessness of his apology was almost equivalent to a fresh insult.
The outcry was greater than ever. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch shrugged his
shoulders and went away. All this was very stupid, to say nothing of its
gross indecency--

A calculated and premeditated indecency as it seemed at first sight--and
therefore a premeditated and utterly brutal insult to our whole society.
So it was taken to be by every one. We began by promptly and unanimously
striking young Stavrogin's name off the list of club members. Then it
was decided to send an appeal in the name of the whole club to the
governor, begging him at once (without waiting for the case to be
formally tried in court) to use "the administrative power entrusted to
him" to restrain this dangerous ruffian, "this duelling bully from the
capital, and so protect the tranquillity of all the gentry of our town
from injurious encroachments." It was added with angry resentment that
"a law might be found to control even Mr. Stavrogin." This phrase was
prepared by way of a thrust at the governor on account of Varvara
Petrovna. They elaborated it with relish. As ill luck would have it,
the governor was not in the town at the time. He had gone to a little
distance to stand godfather to the child of a very charming lady,
recently left a widow in an interesting condition. But it was known that
he would soon be back. In the meanwhile they got up a regular ovation
for the respected and insulted gentleman; people embraced and kissed
him; the whole town called upon him. It was even proposed to give a
subscription dinner in his honour, and they only gave up the idea at
his earnest request--reflecting possibly at last that the man had,
after all, been pulled by the nose and that that was really nothing
to congratulate him upon. Yet, how had it happened? How could it have
happened? It is remarkable that no one in the whole town put down this
savage act to madness. They must have been predisposed to expect such
actions from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, even when he was sane. For my part
I don't know to this day how to explain it, in spite of the event that
quickly followed and apparently explained everything, and conciliated
every one. I will add also that, four years later, in reply to a
discreet question from me about the incident at the club, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch answered, frowning: "I wasn't quite well at the time."
But there is no need to anticipate events.

The general outburst of hatred with which every one fell upon the
"ruffian and duelling bully from the capital" also struck me as curious.
They insisted on seeing an insolent design and deliberate intention to
insult our whole society at once. The truth was no one liked the fellow,
but, on the contrary, he had set every one against him--and one wonders
how. Up to the last incident he had never quarrelled with anyone, nor
insulted anyone, but was as courteous as a gentleman in a fashion-plate,
if only the latter were able to speak. I imagine that he was hated for
his pride. Even our ladies, who had begun by adoring him, railed against
him now, more loudly than the men. Varvara Petrovna was dreadfully
overwhelmed. She confessed afterwards to Stepan Trofimovitch that she
had had a foreboding of all this long before, that every day for the
last six months she had been expecting "just something of that sort,"
a remarkable admission on the part of his own mother. "It's begun!" she
thought to herself with a shudder. The morning after the incident at the
club she cautiously but firmly approached the subject with her son, but
the poor woman was trembling all over in spite of her firmness. She had
not slept all night and even went out early to Stepan Trofimovitch's
lodgings to ask his advice, and shed tears there, a thing which she had
never been known to do before anyone. She longed for "Nicolas" to say
something to her, to deign to give some explanation. Nikolay, who was
always so polite and respectful to his mother, listened to her for some
time scowling, but very seriously. He suddenly got up without saying
a word, kissed her hand and went away. That very evening, as though by
design, he perpetrated another scandal. It was of a more harmless and
ordinary character than the first. Yet, owing to the state of the public
mind, it increased the outcry in the town.

Our friend Liputin turned up and called on Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
immediately after the latter's interview with his mother, and earnestly
begged for the honour of his company at a little party he was giving for
his wife's birthday that evening. Varvara Petrovna had long watched with
a pang at her heart her son's taste for such low company, but she had
not dared to speak of it to him. He had made several acquaintances
besides Liputin in the third rank of our society, and even in lower
depths--he had a propensity for making such friends. He had never been
in Liputin's house before, though he had met the man himself. He guessed
that Liputin's invitation now was the consequence of the previous day's
scandal, and that as a local liberal he was delighted at the scandal,
genuinely believing that that was the proper way to treat stewards at
the club, and that it was very well done. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch smiled
and promised to come.

A great number of guests had assembled. The company was not very
presentable, but very sprightly. Liputin, vain and envious, only
entertained visitors twice a year, but on those occasions he did
it without stint. The most honoured of the invited guests, Stepan
Trofimovitch, was prevented by illness from being present. Tea was
handed, and there were refreshments and vodka in plenty. Cards were
played at three tables, and while waiting for supper the young people
got up a dance. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch led out Madame Liputin--a very
pretty little woman who was dreadfully shy of him--took two turns round
the room with her, sat down beside her, drew her into conversation and
made her laugh. Noticing at last how pretty she was when she laughed, he
suddenly, before all the company, seized her round the waist and
kissed her on the lips two or three times with great relish. The poor
frightened lady fainted. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch took his hat and went
up to the husband, who stood petrified in the middle of the general
excitement. Looking at him he, too, became confused and muttering
hurriedly "Don't be angry," went away. Liputin ran after him in the
entry, gave him his fur-coat with his own hands, and saw him down the
stairs, bowing. But next day a rather amusing sequel followed this
comparatively harmless prank--a sequel from which Liputin gained some
credit, and of which he took the fullest possible advantage.

At ten o'clock in the morning Liputin's servant Agafya, an
easy-mannered, lively, rosy-cheeked peasant woman of thirty, made
her appearance at Stavrogin's house, with a message for Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. She insisted on seeing "his honour himself." He had a
very bad headache, but he went out. Varvara Petrovna succeeded in being
present when the message was given.

"Sergay Vassilyevitch" (Liputin's name), Agafya rattled off briskly,
"bade me first of all give you his respectful greetings and ask after
your health, what sort of night your honour spent after yesterday's
doings, and how your honour feels now after yesterday's doings?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch smiled.

"Give him my greetings and thank him, and tell your master from me,
Agafya, that he's the most sensible man in the town."

"And he told me to answer that," Agafya caught him up still more
briskly, "that he knows that without your telling him, and wishes you
the same."

"Really! But how could he tell what I should say to you?"

"I can't say in what way he could tell, but when I had set off and had
gone right down the street, I heard something, and there he was, running
after me without his cap. 'I say, Agafya, if by any chance he says to
you, "Tell your master that he has more sense than all the town," you
tell him at once, don't forget, "The master himself knows that very
well, and wishes you the same."'"


III

At last the interview with the governor took place too. Our dear, mild,
Ivan Ossipovitch had only just returned and only just had time to hear
the angry complaint from the club. There was no doubt that something
must be done, but he was troubled. The hospitable old man seemed also
rather afraid of his young kinsman. He made up his mind, however, to
induce him to apologise to the club and to his victim in satisfactory
form, and, if required, by letter, and then to persuade him to leave us
for a time, travelling, for instance, to improve his mind, in Italy, or
in fact anywhere abroad. In the waiting-room in which on this occasion
he received Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch (who had been at other times
privileged as a relation to wander all over the house unchecked),
Alyosha Telyatnikov, a clerk of refined manners, who was also a member
of the governor's household, was sitting in a corner opening envelopes
at a table, and in the next room, at the window nearest to the door, a
stout and sturdy colonel, a former friend and colleague of the governor,
was sitting alone reading the Golos, paying no attention, of course,
to what was taking place in the waiting-room; in fact, he had his back
turned. Ivan Ossipovitch approached the subject in a roundabout way,
almost in a whisper, but kept getting a little muddled. Nikolay looked
anything but cordial, not at all as a relation should. He was pale and
sat looking down and continually moving his eyebrows as though trying to
control acute pain.

"You have a kind heart and a generous one, Nicolas," the old man put in
among other things, "you're a man of great culture, you've grown up in
the highest circles, and here too your behaviour has hitherto been a
model, which has been a great consolation to your mother, who is so
precious to all of us.... And now again everything has appeared in such
an unaccountable light, so detrimental to all! I speak as a friend of
your family, as an old man who loves you sincerely and a relation, at
whose words you cannot take offence.... Tell me, what drives you to such
reckless proceedings so contrary to all accepted rules and habits? What
can be the meaning of such acts which seem almost like outbreaks of
delirium?"

Nikolay listened with vexation and impatience. All at once there was a
gleam of something sly and mocking in his eyes.

"I'll tell you what drives me to it," he said sullenly, and looking
round him he bent down to Ivan Ossipovitch's ear. The refined Alyosha
Telyatnikov moved three steps farther away towards the window, and the
colonel coughed over the Golos. Poor Ivan Ossipovitch hurriedly and
trustfully inclined his ear; he was exceedingly curious. And then
something utterly incredible, though on the other side only too
unmistakable, took place. The old man suddenly felt that, instead of
telling him some interesting secret, Nikolay had seized the upper
part of his ear between his teeth and was nipping it rather hard. He
shuddered, and breath failed him.

"Nicolas, this is beyond a joke!" he moaned mechanically in a voice not
his own.

Alyosha and the colonel had not yet grasped the situation, besides they
couldn't see, and fancied up to the end that the two were whispering
together; and yet the old man's desperate face alarmed them. They looked
at one another with wide-open eyes, not knowing whether to rush to his
assistance as agreed or to wait. Nikolay noticed this perhaps, and bit
the harder.

"Nicolas! Nicolas!" his victim moaned again, "come... you've had your
joke, that's enough!"

In another moment the poor governor would certainly have died of terror;
but the monster had mercy on him, and let go his ear. The old man's
deadly terror lasted for a full minute, and it was followed by a sort of
fit. Within half an hour Nikolay was arrested and removed for the time
to the guard-room, where he was confined in a special cell, with a
special sentinel at the door. This decision was a harsh one, but
our mild governor was so angry that he was prepared to take the
responsibility even if he had to face Varvara Petrovna. To the general
amazement, when this lady arrived at the governor's in haste and in
nervous irritation to discuss the matter with him at once, she was
refused admittance, whereupon, without getting out of the carriage, she
returned home, unable to believe her senses.

And at last everything was explained! At two o'clock in the morning
the prisoner, who had till then been calm and had even slept, suddenly
became noisy, began furiously beating on the door with his fists,--with
unnatural strength wrenched the iron grating off the door, broke the
window, and cut his hands all over. When the officer on duty ran with
a detachment of men and the keys and ordered the cell to be opened
that they might rush in and bind the maniac, it appeared that he was
suffering from acute brain fever. He was taken home to his mother.

Everything was explained at once. All our three doctors gave it as their
opinion that the patient might well have been in a delirious state for
three days before, and that though he might have apparently been in
possession of full consciousness and cunning, yet he might have been
deprived of common sense and will, which was indeed borne out by the
facts. So it turned out that Liputin had guessed the truth sooner than
any one. Ivan Ossipovitch, who was a man of delicacy and feeling,
was completely abashed. But what was striking was that he, too, had
considered Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch capable of any mad action even when
in the full possession of his faculties. At the club, too, people were
ashamed and wondered how it was they had failed to "see the elephant"
and had missed the only explanation of all these marvels: there were,
of course, sceptics among them, but they could not long maintain their
position.

Nikolay was in bed for more than two months. A famous doctor was
summoned from Moscow for a consultation; the whole town called on
Varvara Petrovna. She forgave them. When in the spring Nikolay had
completely recovered and assented without discussion to his mother's
proposal that he should go for a tour to Italy, she begged him further
to pay visits of farewell to all the neighbours, and so far as possible
to apologise where necessary. Nikolay agreed with great alacrity. It
became known at the club that he had had a most delicate explanation
with Pyotr Pavlovitch Gaganov, at the house of the latter, who had been
completely satisfied with his apology. As he went round to pay these
calls Nikolay was very grave and even gloomy. Every one appeared to
receive him sympathetically, but everybody seemed embarrassed and glad
that he was going to Italy. Ivan Ossipovitch was positively tearful, but
was, for some reason, unable to bring himself to embrace him, even
at the final leave-taking. It is true that some of us retained the
conviction that the scamp had simply been making fun of us, and that the
illness was neither here nor there. He went to see Liputin too.

"Tell me," he said, "how could you guess beforehand what I should say
about your sense and prime Agafya with an answer to it?"

"Why," laughed Liputin, "it was because I recognised that you were a
clever man, and so I foresaw what your answer would be."

"Anyway, it was a remarkable coincidence. But, excuse me, did you
consider me a sensible man and not insane when you sent Agafya?"

"For the cleverest and most rational, and I only pretended to believe
that you were insane.... And you guessed at once what was in my mind,
and sent a testimonial to my wit through Agafya."

"Well, there you're a little mistaken. I really was... unwell..."
muttered Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, frowning. "Bah!" he cried, "do you
suppose I'm capable of attacking people when I'm in my senses? What
object would there be in it?"

Liputin shrank together and didn't know what to answer. Nikolay turned
pale or, at least, so it seemed to Liputin.

"You have a very peculiar way of looking at things, anyhow," Nikolay
went on, "but as for Agafya, I understand, of course, that you simply
sent her to be rude to me."

"I couldn't challenge you to a duel, could I?"

"Oh, no, of course! I seem to have heard that you're not fond of
duels...."

"Why borrow from the French?" said Liputin, doubling up again.

"You're for nationalism, then?"

Liputin shrank into himself more than ever.

"Bah, bah! What do I see?" cried Nicolas, noticing a volume of Considérant
in the most conspicuous place on the table. "You don't mean to say
you're a Fourierist! I'm afraid you must be! And isn't this too
borrowing from the French?" he laughed, tapping the book with his
finger.

"No, that's not taken from the French," Liputin cried with positive
fury, jumping up from his chair. "That is taken from the universal
language of humanity, not simply from the French. From the language of
the universal social republic and harmony of mankind, let me tell you!
Not simply from the French!"

"Foo! hang it all! There's no such language!" laughed Nikolay.

Sometimes a trifle will catch the attention and exclusively absorb it
for a time. Most of what I have to tell of young Stavrogin will come
later. But I will note now as a curious fact that of all the impressions
made on him by his stay in our town, the one most sharply imprinted
on his memory was the unsightly and almost abject figure of the little
provincial official, the coarse and jealous family despot, the miserly
money-lender who picked up the candle-ends and scraps left from dinner,
and was at the same time a passionate believer in some visionary future
"social harmony," who at night gloated in ecstasies over fantastic
pictures of a future phalanstery, in the approaching realisation of
which, in Russia, and in our province, he believed as firmly as in his
own existence. And that in the very place where he had saved up to
buy himself a "little home," where he had married for the second time,
getting a dowry with his bride, where perhaps, for a hundred miles round
there was not one man, himself included, who was the very least like a
future member "of the universal human republic and social harmony."

"God knows how these people come to exist!" Nikolay wondered, recalling
sometimes the unlooked-for Fourierist.


IV

Our prince travelled for over three years, so that he was almost
forgotten in the town. We learned from Stepan Trofimovitch that he
had travelled all over Europe, that he had even been in Egypt and had
visited Jerusalem, and then had joined some scientific expedition to
Iceland, and he actually did go to Iceland. It was reported too that he
had spent one winter attending lectures in a German university. He did
not write often to his mother, twice a year, or even less, but Varvara
Petrovna was not angry or offended at this. She accepted submissively
and without repining the relations that had been established once for
all between her son and herself. She fretted for her "Nicolas" and
dreamed of him continually. She kept her dreams and lamentations to
herself. She seemed to have become less intimate even with Stepan
Trofimovitch. She was forming secret projects, and seemed to have become
more careful about money than ever. She was more than ever given to
saving money and being angry at Stepan Trofimovitch's losses at cards.

At last, in the April of this year, she received a letter from Paris
from Praskovya Ivanovna Drozdov, the widow of the general and the
friend of Varvara Petrovna's childhood. Praskovya Ivanovna, whom Varvara
Petrovna had not seen or corresponded with for eight years, wrote,
informing her that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had become very intimate
with them and a great friend of her only daughter, Liza, and that he was
intending to accompany them to Switzerland, to Verney-Montreux,
though in the household of Count K. (a very influential personage in
Petersburg), who was now staying in Paris. He was received like a son
of the family, so that he almost lived at the count's. The letter was
brief, and the object of it was perfectly clear, though it contained
only a plain statement of the above-mentioned facts without drawing any
inferences from them. Varvara Petrovna did not pause long to consider;
she made up her mind instantly, made her preparations, and taking with
her her protégée, Dasha (Shatov's sister), she set off in the middle of
April for Paris, and from there went on to Switzerland. She returned in
July, alone, leaving Dasha with the Drozdovs. She brought us the news
that the Drozdovs themselves had promised to arrive among us by the end
of August.

The Drozdovs, too, were landowners of our province, but the official
duties of General Ivan Ivanovitch Drozdov (who had been a friend
of Varvara Petrovna's and a colleague of her husband's) had always
prevented them from visiting their magnificent estate. On the death of
the general, which had taken place the year before, the inconsolable
widow had gone abroad with her daughter, partly in order to try the
grape-cure which she proposed to carry out at Verney-Montreux during the
latter half of the summer. On their return to Russia they intended to
settle in our province for good. She had a large house in the town which
had stood empty for many years with the windows nailed up. They were
wealthy people. Praskovya Ivanovna had been, in her first marriage, a
Madame Tushin, and like her school-friend, Varvara Petrovna, was the
daughter of a government contractor of the old school, and she too had
been an heiress at her marriage. Tushin, a retired cavalry captain, was
also a man of means, and of some ability. At his death he left a snug
fortune to his only daughter Liza, a child of seven. Now that Lizaveta
Nikolaevna was twenty-two her private fortune might confidently be
reckoned at 200,000 roubles, to say nothing of the property--which was
bound to come to her at the death of her mother, who had no children by
her second marriage. Varvara Petrovna seemed to be very well satisfied
with her expedition. In her own opinion she had succeeded in coming to
a satisfactory understanding with Praskovya Ivanovna, and immediately
on her arrival she confided everything to Stepan Trofimovitch. She was
positively effusive with him as she had not been for a very long time.

"Hurrah!" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, and snapped his fingers.

He was in a perfect rapture, especially as he had spent the whole time
of his friend's absence in extreme dejection. On setting off she had not
even taken leave of him properly, and had said nothing of her plan to
"that old woman," dreading, perhaps, that he might chatter about it.
She was cross with him at the time on account of a considerable gambling
debt which she had suddenly discovered. But before she left Switzerland
she had felt that on her return she must make up for it to her forsaken
friend, especially as she had treated him very curtly for a long time
past. Her abrupt and mysterious departure had made a profound and
poignant impression on the timid heart of Stepan Trofimovitch, and to
make matters worse he was beset with other difficulties at the same
time. He was worried by a very considerable money obligation, which had
weighed upon him for a long time and which he could never hope to meet
without Varvara Petrovna's assistance. Moreover, in the May of this
year, the term of office of our mild and gentle Ivan Ossipovitch came to
an end. He was superseded under rather unpleasant circumstances. Then,
while Varvara Petrovna was still away, there followed the arrival of
our new governor, Andrey Antonovitch von Lembke, and with that a change
began at once to be perceptible in the attitude of almost the whole
of our provincial society towards Varvara Petrovna, and consequently
towards Stepan Trofimovitch. He had already had time anyway to make some
disagreeable though valuable observations, and seemed very apprehensive
alone without Varvara Petrovna. He had an agitating suspicion that he
had already been mentioned to the governor as a dangerous man. He knew
for a fact that some of our ladies meant to give up calling on Varvara
Petrovna. Of our governor's wife (who was only expected to arrive in the
autumn) it was reported that though she was, so it was heard, proud,
she was a real aristocrat, and "not like that poor Varvara Petrovna."
Everybody seemed to know for a fact, and in the greatest detail, that
our governor's wife and Varvara Petrovna had met already in society and
had parted enemies, so that the mere mention of Madame von Lembke's name
would, it was said, make a painful impression on Varvara Petrovna.
The confident and triumphant air of Varvara Petrovna, the contemptuous
indifference with which she heard of the opinions of our provincial
ladies and the agitation in local society, revived the flagging spirits
of Stepan Trofimovitch and cheered him up at once. With peculiar,
gleefully-obsequious humour, he was beginning to describe the new
governor's arrival.

"You are no doubt aware, _excellente amie_," he said, jauntily
and coquettishly drawling his words, "what is meant by a Russian
administrator, speaking generally, and what is meant by a new Russian
administrator, that is the newly-baked, newly-established..._ces
interminables mots Russes!_ But I don't think you can know in practice
what is meant by administrative ardour, and what sort of thing that is."

"Administrative ardour? I don't know what that is."

"Well... _Vous savez chez nous... En un mot,_  set the most insignificant
nonentity to sell miserable tickets at a railway station, and the
nonentity will at once feel privileged to look down on you like a
Jupiter, _pour montrer son pouvoir_ when you go to take a ticket. 'Now
then,' he says, 'I shall show you my power'... and in them it comes to a
genuine, administrative ardour. _En un mot,_ I've read that some verger
in one of our Russian churches abroad--_mais c'est très curieux_--drove,
literally drove a distinguished English family, _les dames charmantes_,
out of the church before the beginning of the Lenten service... _vous
savez ces chants et le livre de Job_... on the simple pretext that
'foreigners are not allowed to loaf about a Russian church, and that
they must come at the time fixed....' And he sent them into fainting
fits.... That verger was suffering from an attack of administrative
ardour, _et il a montré son pouvoir_."

"Cut it short if you can, Stepan Trofimovitch."

"Mr. von Lembke is making a tour of the province now. _En un mot,_ this
Andrey Antonovitch, though he is a russified German and of the Orthodox
persuasion, and even--I will say that for him--a remarkably handsome man
of about forty..."

"What makes you think he's a handsome man? He has eyes like a sheep's."

"Precisely so. But in this I yield, of course, to the opinion of our
ladies."

"Let's get on, Stepan Trofimovitch, I beg you! By the way, you're
wearing a red neck-tie. Is it long since you've taken to it?"

"I've... I've only put it on to-day."

"And do you take your constitutional? Do you go for a four-mile walk
every day as the doctor told you to?"

"N-not... always."

"I knew you didn't! I felt sure of that when I was in Switzerland!" she
cried irritably. "Now you must go not four but six miles a day! You've
grown terribly slack, terribly, terribly! You're not simply getting old,
you're getting decrepit.... You shocked me when I first saw you just
now, in spite of your red tie, _quelle idee rouge_! Go on about Von
Lembke if you've really something to tell me, and do finish some time, I
entreat you, I'm tired."

"_En un mot,_ I only wanted to say that he is one of those administrators
who begin to have power at forty, who, till they're forty, have been
stagnating in insignificance and then suddenly come to the front through
suddenly acquiring a wife, or some other equally desperate means....
That is, he has gone away now... that is, I mean to say, it was at once
whispered in both his ears that I am a corrupter of youth, and a hot-bed
of provincial atheism.... He began making inquiries at once."

"Is that true?"

"I took steps about it, in fact. When he was 'informed' that you 'ruled
the province,' _vous savez,_ he allowed himself to use the expression that
'there shall be nothing of that sort in the future.'"

"Did he say that?"

"That 'there shall be nothing of the sort in future,' and, _avec cette
morgue_.... His wife, Yulia Mihailovna, we shall behold at the end of
August, she's coming straight from Petersburg."

"From abroad. We met there."

_"Vraiment?"_

"In Paris and in Switzerland. She's related to the Drozdovs."

"Related! What an extraordinary coincidence! They say she is ambitious
and... supposed to have great connections."

"Nonsense! Connections indeed! She was an old maid without a farthing
till she was five-and-forty. But now she's hooked her Von Lembke,
and, of course, her whole object is to push him forward. They're both
intriguers."

"And they say she's two years older than he is?"

"Five. Her mother used to wear out her skirts on my doorsteps in Moscow;
she used to beg for an invitation to our balls as a favour when my
husband was living. And this creature used to sit all night alone in a
corner without dancing, with her turquoise fly on her forehead, so that
simply from pity I used to have to send her her first partner at two
o'clock in the morning. She was five-and-twenty then, and they used to
rig her out in short skirts like a little girl. It was improper to have
them about at last."

"I seem to see that fly."

"I tell you, as soon as I arrived I was in the thick of an intrigue. You
read Madame Drozdov's letter, of course. What could be clearer? What did
I find? That fool Praskovya herself--she always was a fool--looked at
me as much as to ask why I'd come. You can fancy how surprised I was.
I looked round, and there was that Lembke woman at her tricks, and that
cousin of hers--old Drozdov's nephew--it was all clear. You may be sure
I changed all that in a twinkling, and Praskovya is on my side again,
but what an intrigue!"

"In which you came off victor, however. Bismarck!"

"Without being a Bismarck I'm equal to falseness and stupidity wherever
I meet it, falseness, and Praskovya's folly. I don't know when I've met
such a flabby woman, and what's more her legs are swollen, and she's
a good-natured simpleton, too. What can be more foolish than a
good-natured simpleton?"

"A spiteful fool, _ma bonne amie,_ a spiteful fool is still more foolish,"
Stepan Trofimovitch protested magnanimously.

"You're right, perhaps. Do you remember Liza?"

_"Charmante enfant!"_

"But she's not an _enfant_ now, but a woman, and a woman of character.
She's a generous, passionate creature, and what I like about her, she
stands up to that confiding fool, her mother. There was almost a row
over that cousin."

"Bah, and of course he's no relation of Lizaveta Nikolaevna's at
all.... Has he designs on her?"

"You see, he's a young officer, not by any means talkative, modest in
fact. I always want to be just. I fancy he is opposed to the intrigue
himself, and isn't aiming at anything, and it was only the Von Lembke's
tricks. He had a great respect for Nicolas. You understand, it all
depends on Liza. But I left her on the best of terms with Nicolas,
and he promised he would come to us in November. So it's only the Von
Lembke who is intriguing, and Praskovya is a blind woman. She suddenly
tells me that all my suspicions are fancy. I told her to her face she
was a fool. I am ready to repeat it at the day of judgment. And if it
hadn't been for Nicolas begging me to leave it for a time, I wouldn't
have come away without unmasking that false woman. She's been trying
to ingratiate herself with Count K. through Nicolas. She wants to
come between mother and son. But Liza's on our side, and I came to an
understanding with Praskovya. Do you know that Karmazinov is a relation
of hers?"

"What? A relation of Madame von Lembke?"

"Yes, of hers. Distant."

"Karmazinov, the novelist?"

"Yes, the writer. Why does it surprise you? Of course he considers
himself a great man. Stuck-up creature! She's coming here with him. Now
she's making a fuss of him out there. She's got a notion of setting up a
sort of literary society here. He's coming for a month, he wants to sell
his last piece of property here. I very nearly met him in Switzerland,
and was very anxious not to. Though I hope he will deign to recognise
me. He wrote letters to me in the old days, he has been in my house.
I should like you to dress better, Stepan Trofimovitch; you're growing
more slovenly every day.... Oh, how you torment me! What are you reading
now?"

"I... I..."

"I understand. The same as ever, friends and drinking, the club and
cards, and the reputation of an atheist. I don't like that reputation,
Stepan Trofimovitch; I don't care for you to be called an atheist,
particularly now. I didn't care for it in old days, for it's all nothing
but empty chatter. It must be said at last."

_"Mais, ma chère..."_

"Listen, Stepan Trofimovitch, of course I'm ignorant compared with you
on all learned subjects, but as I was travelling here I thought a great
deal about you. I've come to one conclusion."

"What conclusion?"

"That you and I are not the wisest people in the world, but that there
are people wiser than we are."

"Witty and apt. If there are people wiser than we are, then there are
people more right than we are, and we may be mistaken, you mean? _Mais,
ma bonne amie,_ granted that I may make a mistake, yet have I not the
common, human, eternal, supreme right of freedom of conscience? I have
the right not to be bigoted or superstitious if I don't wish to, and for
that I shall naturally be hated by certain persons to the end of time.
_Et puis, comme on trouve toujours plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I
thoroughly agree with that..."

"What, what did you say?"

"I said, _on trouve toujours plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I
thoroughly..."

"I'm sure that's not your saying. You must have taken it from
somewhere."

"It was Pascal said that."

"Just as I thought...it's not your own. Why don't you ever say anything
like that yourself, so shortly and to the point, instead of dragging
things out to such a length? That's much better than what you said just
now about administrative ardour..."

_"Ma foi, chère..." _why? In the first place probably because I'm not
a Pascal after all, _et puis_... secondly, we Russians never can say
anything in our own language.... We never have said anything hitherto,
at any rate...."

"H'm! That's not true, perhaps. Anyway, you'd better make a note of such
phrases, and remember them, you know, in case you have to talk....
Ach, Stephan Trofimovitch. I have come to talk to you seriously, quite
seriously."

_"Chère, chère amie!"_

"Now that all these Von Lembkes and Karmazinovs.... Oh, my goodness, how
you have deteriorated!... Oh, my goodness, how you do torment me!...
I should have liked these people to feel a respect for you, for they're
not worth your little finger--but the way you behave!... What will they
see? What shall I have to show them? Instead of nobly standing as an
example, keeping up the tradition of the past, you surround yourself
with a wretched rabble, you have picked up impossible habits, you've
grown feeble, you can't do without wine and cards, you read nothing
but Paul de Kock, and write nothing, while all of them write; all your
time's wasted in gossip. How can you bring yourself to be friends with a
wretched creature like your inseparable Liputin?

"Why is he _mine_ and _inseparable_?" Stepan Trofimovitch protested
timidly.

"Where is he now?" Varvara Petrovna went on, sharply and sternly.

"He... he has an infinite respect for you, and he's gone to S----k, to
receive an inheritance left him by his mother."

"He seems to do nothing but get money. And how's Shatov? Is he just the
same?"

_"Irascible, mais bon."_

"I can't endure your Shatov. He's spiteful and he thinks too much of
himself."

"How is Darya Pavlovna?"

"You mean Dasha? What made you think of her?" Varvara Petrovna looked
at him inquisitively. "She's quite well. I left her with the Drozdovs. I
heard something about your son in Switzerland. Nothing good."

_"Oh, c'est un histoire bien bête! Je vous attendais, ma bonne amie, pour
vous raconter..."_

"Enough, Stepan Trofimovitch. Leave me in peace. I'm worn out. We
shall have time to talk to our heart's content, especially of what's
unpleasant. You've begun to splutter when you laugh, it's a sign of
senility! And what a strange way of laughing you've taken to!... Good
Heavens, what a lot of bad habits you've fallen into! Karmazinov won't
come and see you! And people are only too glad to make the most of
anything as it is.... You've betrayed yourself completely now. Well,
come, that's enough, that's enough, I'm tired. You really might have
mercy upon one!"

Stepan Trofimovitch "had mercy," but he withdrew in great perturbation.
