
"Don't interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr. Lawyer," cried
Lebedeff's nephew angrily. "Of course there is a difference between
a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this case the
principle is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles
are missing is only a side issue. The point to be emphasized is that
Burdovsky will not accept your highness's charity; he flings it back in
your face, and it scarcely matters if there are a hundred roubles or two
hundred and fifty. Burdovsky has refused ten thousand roubles; you
heard him. He would not have returned even a hundred roubles if he was
dishonest! The hundred and fifty roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for
his travelling expenses. You may jeer at our stupidity and at our
inexperience in business matters; you have done all you could already to
make us look ridiculous; but do not dare to call us dishonest. The
four of us will club together every day to repay the hundred and fifty
roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it in instalments of a rouble
at a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdovsky is poor, he
has no millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff sent in
his bill. We counted on winning... Who would not have done the same in
such a case?"

"Who indeed?" exclaimed Prince S.

"I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"It reminds me," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, "of the famous plea
of a certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six people
in order to rob them. He excused his client on the score of poverty.
'It is quite natural,' he said in conclusion, 'considering the state
of misery he was in, that he should have thought of murdering these six
people; which of you, gentlemen, would not have done the same in his
place?'"

"Enough," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with anger,
"we have had enough of this balderdash!"

In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming
eyes, casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company,
in which she could no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had
restrained herself so long that she felt forced to vent her rage on
somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha Prokofievna saw at once how it was
with her. "She flies into these rages sometimes," said Ivan Fedorovitch
to Prince S. the next day, "but she is not often so violent as she was
yesterday; it does not happen more than once in three years."

"Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!" cried Mrs. Epanchin. "Why
do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take me away
before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag
me away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly.
You might at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our
way out now without your help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait
a moment 'till I thank the prince! Thank you, prince, for the
entertainment you have given us! It was most amusing to hear these young
men... It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal, worse than a nightmare!
Is it possible that there can be many such people on earth? Be quiet,
Aglaya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business! Don't fuss
round me like that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me! So, my dear,"
she cried, addressing the prince, "you go so far as to beg their
pardon! He says, 'Forgive me for offering you a fortune.' And you, you
mountebank, what are you laughing at?" she cried, turning suddenly on
Lebedeff's nephew. "'We refuse ten thousand roubles; we do not beseech,
we demand!' As if he did not know that this idiot will call on them
tomorrow to renew his offers of money and friendship. You will, won't
you? You will? Come, will you, or won't you?"

"I shall," said the prince, with gentle humility.

"You hear him! You count upon it, too," she continued, turning upon
Doktorenko. "You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your
pocket. And there you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our
eyes! No, my dear sir, you may take other people in! I can see through
all your airs and graces, I see your game!"

"Lizabetha Prokofievna!" exclaimed the prince.

"Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going,
we will take the prince with us," said Prince S. with a smile, in the
coolest possible way.

The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively
horrified. Mrs. Epanchin's language astonished everybody. Some who stood
a little way off smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore
an expression of utmost ecstasy.

"Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame," remarked
Doktorenko, who was considerably put out of countenance.

"Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us, sir,"
answered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage. "Leave
me alone, will you?" she cried violently to those around her, who were
trying to keep her quiet. "No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as you said
yourself just now, a lawyer said in open court that he found it quite
natural that a man should murder six people because he was in misery,
the world must be coming to an end. I had not heard of it before. Now
I understand everything. And this stutterer, won't he turn out a
murderer?" she cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with
stupefaction. "I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly,
he will refuse it because his conscience will not allow him to accept
it, but he will go murdering you by night and walking off with your
cashbox, with a clear conscience! He does not call it a dishonest action
but 'the impulse of a noble despair'; 'a negation'; or the devil knows
what! Bah! everything is upside down, everyone walks head downwards. A
young girl, brought up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in the
middle of the street, saying: 'Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or
Ivanitch, the other day!' And you think it quite right? You call such
conduct estimable and natural? The 'woman question'? Look here," she
continued, pointing to Colia, "the other day that whippersnapper told
me that this was the whole meaning of the 'woman question.' But even
supposing that your mother is a fool, you are none the less, bound to
treat her with humanity. Why did you come here tonight so insolently?
'Give us our rights, but don't dare to speak in our presence. Show us
every mark of deepest respect, while we treat you like the scum of
the earth.' The miscreants have written a tissue of calumny in their
article, and these are the men who seek for truth, and do battle for the
right! 'We do not beseech, we demand, you will get no thanks from
us, because you will be acting to satisfy your own conscience!'
What morality! But, good heavens! if you declare that the prince's
generosity will, excite no gratitude in you, he might answer that he is
not, bound to be grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only satisfying
his own conscience. But you counted on the prince's, gratitude towards
Pavlicheff; you never lent him any money; he owes you nothing; then what
were you counting upon if not on his gratitude? And if you appeal to
that sentiment in others, why should you expect to be exempted from
it? They are mad! They say society is savage and inhuman because it
despises a young girl who has been seduced. But if you call society
inhuman you imply that the young girl is made to suffer by its censure.
How then, can you hold her up to the scorn of society in the newspapers
without realizing that you are making her suffering, still greater?
Madmen! Vain fools! They don't believe in God, they don't believe in
Christ! But you are so eaten up by pride and vanity, that you will end
by devouring each other--that is my prophecy! Is not this absurd? Is it
not monstrous chaos? And after all this, that shameless creature will
go and beg their pardon! Are there many people like you? What are
you smiling at? Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before
you?--Yes, I am disgraced--it can't be helped now! But don't you jeer at
me, you scum!" (this was aimed at Hippolyte). "He is almost at his last
gasp, yet he corrupts others. You, have got hold of this lad "--(she
pointed to Colia); "you, have turned his head, you have taught him to
be an atheist, you don't believe in God, and you are not too old to be
whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,
you will call on them tomorrow, will you?" she asked the prince
breathlessly, for the second time.

"Yes."

"Then I will never speak to you again." She made a sudden movement to
go, and then turned quickly back. "And you will call on that atheist?"
she continued, pointing to Hippolyte. "How dare you grin at me like
that?" she shouted furiously, rushing at the invalid, whose mocking
smile drove her to distraction.

Exclamations arose on all sides.

"Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna!"

"Mother, this is disgraceful!" cried Aglaya.

Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm,
while her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.

"Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch," he answered calmly; "your
mother knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to explain
why I was laughing. I shall be delighted if you will let me--"

A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him
from finishing his sentence.

"He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she
saw him wiping the blood from his lips. "Why do you talk? You ought to
go home to bed."

"So I will," he whispered hoarsely. "As soon as I get home I will go to
bed at once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight; Botkine told me
so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few farewell
words, if you will let me."

"But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of
yourself; what is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed,
do!" cried Mrs. Epanchin in horror.

"When I do go to bed I shall never get up again," said Hippolyte, with a
smile. "I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I died,
but as my legs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to
come here with them to-day--but I am very tired."

"Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?"

Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.

"Thank you," he said gently. "Sit opposite to me, and let us talk. We
must have a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for it."
He smiled at her once more. "Remember that today, for the last time, I
am out in the air, and in the company of my fellow-men, and that in a
fortnight I shall I certainly be no longer in this world. So, in a way,
this is my farewell to nature and to men. I am not very sentimental,
but do you know, I am quite glad that all this has happened at Pavlofsk,
where at least one can see a green tree."

"But why talk now?" replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more
alarmed; "You are quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting, and
now you can hardly breathe. You are gasping."

"I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish? Do you
know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a
long while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only
person who still comes to see me. You are an original and eccentric
woman; I have seen that for myself--Do you know, I have even been rather
fond of you?"

"Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!"

"You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That
is your daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized
her directly, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least,
look on beauty for the last time in my life," he said with a wry smile.
"You are here with the prince, and your husband, and a large company.
Why should you refuse to gratify my last wish?"

"Give me a chair!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one for
herself and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. "Colia, you must go home
with him," she commanded, "and tomorrow I will come my self."

"Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea?... I am exhausted. Do
you know what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna? I think you wanted to
take the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and let us spend
the evening together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea.
Forgive me for being so free and easy--but I know you are kind, and
the prince is kind, too. In fact, we are all good-natured people--it is
really quite comical."

The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out,
followed by Vera.

"It is quite true," said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. "Talk, but not too
loud, and don't excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you. Prince,
you don't deserve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I will,
all the same, but I won't apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody! It
is absurd! However, forgive me, prince, if I blew you up--that is, if
you like, of course. But please don't let me keep anyone," she added
suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of resentment, as
though they had grievously offended her. "I can come home alone quite
well."

But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly. The
prince immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized
for not having thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite
words, and asked Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the
terrace. He very nearly asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the
University, but stopped himself in time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince
S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable. Adelaida and Alexandra
had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now mingled with
satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that
Lizabetha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still
frowned, and sat apart in silence. All the other guests stayed on as
well; no one wanted to go, not even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said
something to him in passing which did not seem to please him, for he
immediately went and sulked in a corner. The prince took care to offer
tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well as the rest. The invitation
made them rather uncomfortable. They muttered that they would wait for
Hippolyte, and went and sat by themselves in a distant corner of the
verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no doubt ordered it
for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was striking
eleven.

X.

After moistening his lips with the tea which Vera Lebedeff brought him,
Hippolyte set the cup down on the table, and glanced round. He seemed
confused and almost at a loss.

"Just look, Lizabetha Prokofievna," he began, with a kind of feverish
haste; "these china cups are supposed to be extremely valuable. Lebedeff
always keeps them locked up in his china-cupboard; they were part of his
wife's dowry. Yet he has brought them out tonight--in your honour, of
course! He is so pleased--" He was about to add something else, but
could not find the words.

"There, he is feeling embarrassed; I expected as much," whispered
Evgenie Pavlovitch suddenly in the prince's ear. "It is a bad sign;
what do you think? Now, out of spite, he will come out with something
so outrageous that even Lizabetha Prokofievna will not be able to stand
it."

Muishkin looked at him inquiringly.

"You do not care if he does?" added Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Neither do I;
in fact, I should be glad, merely as a proper punishment for our dear
Lizabetha Prokofievna. I am very anxious that she should get it, without
delay, and I shall stay till she does. You seem feverish."

"Never mind; by-and-by; yes, I am not feeling well," said the prince
impatiently, hardly listening. He had just heard Hippolyte mention his
own name.

"You don't believe it?" said the invalid, with a nervous laugh. "I don't
wonder, but the prince will have no difficulty in believing it; he will
not be at all surprised."

"Do you hear, prince--do you hear that?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
turning towards him.

There was laughter in the group around her, and Lebedeff stood before
her gesticulating wildly.

"He declares that your humbug of a landlord revised this gentleman's
article--the article that was read aloud just now--in which you got such
a charming dressing-down."

The prince regarded Lebedeff with astonishment.

"Why don't you say something?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, stamping her
foot.

"Well," murmured the prince, with his eyes still fixed on Lebedeff, "I
can see now that he did."

"Is it true?" she asked eagerly.

"Absolutely, your excellency," said Lebedeff, without the least
hesitation.

Mrs. Epanchin almost sprang up in amazement at his answer, and at the
assurance of his tone.

"He actually seems to boast of it!" she cried.

"I am base--base!" muttered Lebedeff, beating his breast, and hanging
his head.

"What do I care if you are base or not? He thinks he has only to say,
'I am base,' and there is an end of it. As to you, prince, are you not
ashamed?--I repeat, are you not ashamed, to mix with such riff-raff? I
will never forgive you!"

"The prince will forgive me!" said Lebedeff with emotional conviction.

Keller suddenly left his seat, and approached Lizabetha. Prokofievna.

"It was only out of generosity, madame," he said in a resonant voice,
"and because I would not betray a friend in an awkward position, that
I did not mention this revision before; though you heard him yourself
threatening to kick us down the steps. To clear the matter up, I declare
now that I did have recourse to his assistance, and that I paid him six
roubles for it. But I did not ask him to correct my style; I simply went
to him for information concerning the facts, of which I was ignorant
to a great extent, and which he was competent to give. The story of the
gaiters, the appetite in the Swiss professor's house, the substitution
of fifty roubles for two hundred and fifty--all such details, in fact,
were got from him. I paid him six roubles for them; but he did not
correct the style."

"I must state that I only revised the first part of the article,"
interposed Lebedeff with feverish impatience, while laughter rose from
all around him; "but we fell out in the middle over one idea, so I never
corrected the second part. Therefore I cannot be held responsible for
the numerous grammatical blunders in it."

"That is all he thinks of!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"May I ask when this article was revised?" said Evgenie Pavlovitch to
Keller.

"Yesterday morning," he replied, "we had an interview which we all gave
our word of honour to keep secret."

"The very time when he was cringing before you and making protestations
of devotion! Oh, the mean wretches! I will have nothing to do with your
Pushkin, and your daughter shall not set foot in my house!"

Lizabetha Prokofievna was about to rise, when she saw Hippolyte
laughing, and turned upon him with irritation.

"Well, sir, I suppose you wanted to make me look ridiculous?"

"Heaven forbid!" he answered, with a forced smile. "But I am more than
ever struck by your eccentricity, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I admit that I
told you of Lebedeff's duplicity, on purpose. I knew the effect it would
have on you,--on you alone, for the prince will forgive him. He has
probably forgiven him already, and is racking his brains to find some
excuse for him--is not that the truth, prince?"

He gasped as he spoke, and his strange agitation seemed to increase.

"Well?" said Mrs. Epanchin angrily, surprised at his tone; "well, what
more?"

"I have heard many things of the kind about you...they delighted me... I
have learned to hold you in the highest esteem," continued Hippolyte.

His words seemed tinged with a kind of sarcastic mockery, yet he was
extremely agitated, casting suspicious glances around him, growing
confused, and constantly losing the thread of his ideas. All this,
together with his consumptive appearance, and the frenzied expression of
his blazing eyes, naturally attracted the attention of everyone present.

"I might have been surprised (though I admit I know nothing of the
world), not only that you should have stayed on just now in the company
of such people as myself and my friends, who are not of your class, but
that you should let these... young ladies listen to such a scandalous
affair, though no doubt novel-reading has taught them all there is to
know. I may be mistaken; I hardly know what I am saying; but surely
no one but you would have stayed to please a whippersnapper (yes,
a whippersnapper; I admit it) to spend the evening and take part in
everything--only to be ashamed of it tomorrow. (I know I express myself
badly.) I admire and appreciate it all extremely, though the expression
on the face of his excellency, your husband, shows that he thinks it
very improper. He-he!" He burst out laughing, and was seized with a
fit of coughing which lasted for two minutes and prevented him from
speaking.

"He has lost his breath now!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna coldly, looking
at him with more curiosity than pity: "Come, my dear boy, that is quite
enough--let us make an end of this."

Ivan Fedorovitch, now quite out of patience, interrupted suddenly. "Let
me remark in my turn, sir," he said in tones of deep annoyance, "that
my wife is here as the guest of Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, our friend and
neighbour, and that in any case, young man, it is not for you to pass
judgment on the conduct of Lizabetha Prokofievna, or to make remarks
aloud in my presence concerning what feelings you think may be read
in my face. Yes, my wife stayed here," continued the general, with
increasing irritation, "more out of amazement than anything else.
Everyone can understand that a collection of such strange young men
would attract the attention of a person interested in contemporary life.
I stayed myself, just as I sometimes stop to look on in the street when
I see something that may be regarded as-as-as-"

"As a curiosity," suggested Evgenie Pavlovitch, seeing his excellency
involved in a comparison which he could not complete.

"That is exactly the word I wanted," said the general with
satisfaction--"a curiosity. However, the most astonishing and, if I may
so express myself, the most painful, thing in this matter, is that you
cannot even understand, young man, that Lizabetha Prokofievna, only
stayed with you because you are ill,--if you really are dying--moved
by the pity awakened by your plaintive appeal, and that her
name, character, and social position place her above all risk of
contamination. Lizabetha Prokofievna!" he continued, now crimson with
rage, "if you are coming, we will say goodnight to the prince, and--"

"Thank you for the lesson, general," said Hippolyte, with unexpected
gravity, regarding him thoughtfully.

"Two minutes more, if you please, dear Ivan Fedorovitch," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna to her husband; "it seems to me that he is in a fever
and delirious; you can see by his eyes what a state he is in; it is
impossible to let him go back to Petersburg tonight. Can you put him
up, Lef Nicolaievitch? I hope you are not bored, dear prince," she
added suddenly to Prince S. "Alexandra, my dear, come here! Your hair is
coming down."

She arranged her daughter's hair, which was not in the least disordered,
and gave her a kiss. This was all that she had called her for.

"I thought you were capable of development," said Hippolyte, coming out
of his fit of abstraction. "Yes, that is what I meant to say," he added,
with the satisfaction of one who suddenly remembers something he had
forgotten. "Here is Burdovsky, sincerely anxious to protect his mother;
is not that so? And he himself is the cause of her disgrace. The prince
is anxious to help Burdovsky and offers him friendship and a large sum
of money, in the sincerity of his heart. And here they stand like two
sworn enemies--ha, ha, ha! You all hate Burdovsky because his behaviour
with regard to his mother is shocking and repugnant to you; do you not?
Is not that true? Is it not true? You all have a passion for beauty and
distinction in outward forms; that is all you care for, isn't it? I have
suspected for a long time that you cared for nothing else! Well, let me
tell you that perhaps there is not one of you who loved your mother as
Burdovsky loved his. As to you, prince, I know that you have sent money
secretly to Burdovsky's mother through Gania. Well, I bet now," he
continued with an hysterical laugh, "that Burdovsky will accuse you of
indelicacy, and reproach you with a want of respect for his mother! Yes,
that is quite certain! Ha, ha, ha!"

He caught his breath, and began to cough once more.

"Come, that is enough! That is all now; you have no more to say? Now
go to bed; you are burning with fever," said Lizabetha Prokofievna
impatiently. Her anxious eyes had never left the invalid. "Good heavens,
he is going to begin again!"

"You are laughing, I think? Why do you keep laughing at me?" said
Hippolyte irritably to Evgenie Pavlovitch, who certainly was laughing.

"I only want to know, Mr. Hippolyte--excuse me, I forget your surname."

"Mr. Terentieff," said the prince.

"Oh yes, Mr. Terentieff. Thank you prince. I heard it just now, but had
forgotten it. I want to know, Mr. Terentieff, if what I have heard about
you is true. It seems you are convinced that if you could speak to the
people from a window for a quarter of an hour, you could make them all
adopt your views and follow you?"

"I may have said so," answered Hippolyte, as if trying to remember.
"Yes, I certainly said so," he continued with sudden animation, fixing
an unflinching glance on his questioner. "What of it?"

"Nothing. I was only seeking further information, to put the finishing
touch."

Evgenie Pavlovitch was silent, but Hippolyte kept his eyes fixed upon
him, waiting impatiently for more.

"Well, have you finished?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to Evgenie. "Make
haste, sir; it is time he went to bed. Have you more to say?" She was
very angry.

"Yes, I have a little more," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, with a smile. "It
seems to me that all you and your friends have said, Mr. Terentieff, and
all you have just put forward with such undeniable talent, may be summed
up in the triumph of right above all, independent of everything else, to
the exclusion of everything else; perhaps even before having discovered
what constitutes the right. I may be mistaken?"

"You are certainly mistaken; I do not even understand you. What else?"

Murmurs arose in the neighbourhood of Burdovsky and his companions;
Lebedeff's nephew protested under his breath.

"I have nearly finished," replied Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"I will only remark that from these premises one could conclude that
might is right--I mean the right of the clenched fist, and of personal
inclination. Indeed, the world has often come to that conclusion.
Prudhon upheld that might is right. In the American War some of the most
advanced Liberals took sides with the planters on the score that the
blacks were an inferior race to the whites, and that might was the right
of the white race."

"Well?"

"You mean, no doubt, that you do not deny that might is right?"

"What then?"

"You are at least logical. I would only point out that from the right
of might, to the right of tigers and crocodiles, or even Daniloff and
Gorsky, is but a step."

"I know nothing about that; what else?"

Hippolyte was scarcely listening. He kept saying "well?" and "what else?"
mechanically, without the least curiosity, and by mere force of habit.

"Why, nothing else; that is all."

"However, I bear you no grudge," said Hippolyte suddenly, and, hardly
conscious of what he was doing, he held out his hand with a smile. The
gesture took Evgenie Pavlovitch by surprise, but with the utmost gravity
he touched the hand that was offered him in token of forgiveness.

"I can but thank you," he said, in a tone too respectful to be sincere,
"for your kindness in letting me speak, for I have often noticed that
our Liberals never allow other people to have an opinion of their own,
and immediately answer their opponents with abuse, if they do not have
recourse to arguments of a still more unpleasant nature."

"What you say is quite true," observed General Epanchin; then, clasping
his hands behind his back, he returned to his place on the terrace
steps, where he yawned with an air of boredom.

"Come, sir, that will do; you weary me," said Lizabetha Prokofievna
suddenly to Evgenie Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte rose all at once, looking troubled and almost frightened.

"It is time for me to go," he said, glancing round in perplexity. "I
have detained you... I wanted to tell you everything... I thought you
all... for the last time... it was a whim..."

He evidently had sudden fits of returning animation, when he awoke
from his semi-delirium; then, recovering full self-possession for a
few moments, he would speak, in disconnected phrases which had perhaps
haunted him for a long while on his bed of suffering, during weary,
sleepless nights.

"Well, good-bye," he said abruptly. "You think it is easy for me to say
good-bye to you? Ha, ha!"

Feeling that his question was somewhat gauche, he smiled angrily. Then
as if vexed that he could not ever express what he really meant, he said
irritably, in a loud voice:

"Excellency, I have the honour of inviting you to my funeral; that is,
if you will deign to honour it with your presence. I invite you all,
gentlemen, as well as the general."

He burst out laughing again, but it was the laughter of a madman.
Lizabetha Prokofievna approached him anxiously and seized his arm.
He stared at her for a moment, still laughing, but soon his face grew
serious.

"Do you know that I came here to see those trees?" pointing to the
trees in the park. "It is not ridiculous, is it? Say that it is not
ridiculous!" he demanded urgently of Lizabetha Prokofievna. Then he
seemed to be plunged in thought. A moment later he raised his head, and
his eyes sought for someone. He was looking for Evgenie Pavlovitch, who
was close by on his right as before, but he had forgotten this, and
his eyes ranged over the assembled company. "Ah! you have not gone!" he
said, when he caught sight of him at last. "You kept on laughing just
now, because I thought of speaking to the people from the window for a
quarter of an hour. But I am not eighteen, you know; lying on that bed,
and looking out of that window, I have thought of all sorts of things
for such a long time that... a dead man has no age, you know. I was
saying that to myself only last week, when I was awake in the night. Do
you know what you fear most? You fear our sincerity more than anything,
although you despise us! The idea crossed my mind that night... You
thought I was making fun of you just now, Lizabetha Prokofievna? No, the
idea of mockery was far from me; I only meant to praise you. Colia
told me the prince called you a child--very well--but let me see, I had
something else to say..." He covered his face with his hands and tried
to collect his thoughts.

"Ah, yes--you were going away just now, and I thought to myself: 'I
shall never see these people again-never again! This is the last time
I shall see the trees, too. I shall see nothing after this but the red
brick wall of Meyer's house opposite my window. Tell them about it--try
to tell them,' I thought. 'Here is a beautiful young girl--you are a
dead man; make them understand that. Tell them that a dead man may
say anything--and Mrs. Grundy will not be angry--ha-ha! You are not
laughing?" He looked anxiously around. "But you know I get so many queer
ideas, lying there in bed. I have grown convinced that nature is full of
mockery--you called me an atheist just now, but you know this nature...
why are you laughing again? You are very cruel!" he added suddenly,
regarding them all with mournful reproach. "I have not corrupted Colia,"
he concluded in a different and very serious tone, as if remembering
something again.

"Nobody here is laughing at you. Calm yourself," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, much moved. "You shall see a new doctor tomorrow; the
other was mistaken; but sit down, do not stand like that! You are
delirious--" Oh, what shall we do with him she cried in anguish, as she
made him sit down again in the arm-chair.

A tear glistened on her cheek. At the sight of it Hippolyte seemed
amazed. He lifted his hand timidly and, touched the tear with his
finger, smiling like a child.

"I... you," he began joyfully. "You cannot tell how I... he always spoke
so enthusiastically of you, Colia here; I liked his enthusiasm. I was
not corrupting him! But I must leave him, too--I wanted to leave
them all--there was not one of them--not one! I wanted to be a man of
action--I had a right to be. Oh! what a lot of things I wanted! Now I
want nothing; I renounce all my wants; I swore to myself that I would
want nothing; let them seek the truth without me! Yes, nature is full
of mockery! Why"--he continued with sudden warmth--"does she create
the choicest beings only to mock at them? The only human being who is
recognized as perfect, when nature showed him to mankind, was given the
mission to say things which have caused the shedding of so much blood
that it would have drowned mankind if it had all been shed at once! Oh!
it is better for me to die! I should tell some dreadful lie too; nature
would so contrive it! I have corrupted nobody. I wanted to live for the
happiness of all men, to find and spread the truth. I used to look out
of my window at the wall of Meyer's house, and say to myself that if I
could speak for a quarter of an hour I would convince the whole world,
and now for once in my life I have come into contact with... you--if
not with the others! And what is the result? Nothing! The sole result
is that you despise me! Therefore I must be a fool, I am useless, it is
time I disappeared! And I shall leave not even a memory! Not a sound,
not a trace, not a single deed! I have not spread a single truth!... Do
not laugh at the fool! Forget him! Forget him forever! I beseech you,
do not be so cruel as to remember! Do you know that if I were not
consumptive, I would kill myself?"

Though he seemed to wish to say much more, he became silent. He fell
back into his chair, and, covering his face with his hands, began to sob
like a little child.

"Oh! what on earth are we to do with him?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
She hastened to him and pressed his head against her bosom, while he
sobbed convulsively.

"Come, come, come! There, you must not cry, that will do. You are a good
child! God will forgive you, because you knew no better. Come now, be a
man! You know presently you will be ashamed."

Hippolyte raised his head with an effort, saying:

"I have little brothers and sisters, over there, poor avid innocent. She
will corrupt them! You are a saint! You are a child yourself--save them!
Snatch them from that... she is... it is shameful! Oh! help them! God
will repay you a hundredfold. For the love of God, for the love of
Christ!"

"Speak, Ivan Fedorovitch! What are we to do?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, irritably. "Please break your majestic silence! I tell you,
if you cannot come to some decision, I will stay here all night myself.
You have tyrannized over me enough, you autocrat!"

She spoke angrily, and in great excitement, and expected an immediate
reply. But in such a case, no matter how many are present, all prefer
to keep silence: no one will take the initiative, but all reserve their
comments till afterwards. There were some present--Varvara Ardalionovna,
for instance--who would have willingly sat there till morning without
saying a word. Varvara had sat apart all the evening without opening her
lips, but she listened to everything with the closest attention; perhaps
she had her reasons for so doing.

"My dear," said the general, "it seems to me that a sick-nurse would be
of more use here than an excitable person like you. Perhaps it would be
as well to get some sober, reliable man for the night. In any case we
must consult the prince, and leave the patient to rest at once. Tomorrow
we can see what can be done for him."

"It is nearly midnight; we are going. Will he come with us, or is he to
stay here?" Doktorenko asked crossly of the prince.

"You can stay with him if you like," said Muishkin.

"There is plenty of room here."

Suddenly, to the astonishment of all, Keller went quickly up to the
general.

"Excellency," he said, impulsively, "if you want a reliable man for the
night, I am ready to sacrifice myself for my friend--such a soul as he
has! I have long thought him a great man, excellency! My article showed
my lack of education, but when he criticizes he scatters pearls!"

Ivan Fedorovitch turned from the boxer with a gesture of despair.

"I shall be delighted if he will stay; it would certainly be difficult
for him to get back to Petersburg," said the prince, in answer to the
eager questions of Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"But you are half asleep, are you not? If you don't want him, I will
take him back to my house! Why, good gracious! He can hardly stand up
himself! What is it? Are you ill?"

Not finding the prince on his death-bed, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
misled by his appearance to think him much better than he was. But his
recent illness, the painful memories attached to it, the fatigue of this
evening, the incident with "Pavlicheff's son," and now this scene with
Hippolyte, had all so worked on his oversensitive nature that he was now
almost in a fever. Moreover, anew trouble, almost a fear, showed itself
in his eyes; he watched Hippolyte anxiously as if expecting something
further.

Suddenly Hippolyte arose. His face, shockingly pale, was that of a man
overwhelmed with shame and despair. This was shown chiefly in the look
of fear and hatred which he cast upon the assembled company, and in the
wild smile upon his trembling lips. Then he cast down his eyes, and with
the same smile, staggered towards Burdovsky and Doktorenko, who stood at
the entrance to the verandah. He had decided to go with them.

"There! that is what I feared!" cried the prince. "It was inevitable!"

Hippolyte turned upon him, a prey to maniacal rage, which set all the
muscles of his face quivering.

"Ah! that is what you feared! It was inevitable, you say! Well, let me
tell you that if I hate anyone here--I hate you all," he cried, in a
hoarse, strained voice--"but you, you, with your jesuitical soul, your
soul of sickly sweetness, idiot, beneficent millionaire--I hate you
worse than anything or anyone on earth! I saw through you and hated you
long ago; from the day I first heard of you. I hated you with my whole
heart. You have contrived all this! You have driven me into this state!
You have made a dying man disgrace himself. You, you, you are the cause
of my abject cowardice! I would kill you if I remained alive! I do not
want your benefits; I will accept none from anyone; do you hear? Not
from any one! I want nothing! I was delirious, do not dare to triumph! I
curse every one of you, once for all!"

Breath failed him here, and he was obliged to stop.

"He is ashamed of his tears!" whispered Lebedeff to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. "It was inevitable. Ah! what a wonderful man the prince is!
He read his very soul."

But Mrs. Epanchin would not deign to look at Lebedeff. Drawn up
haughtily, with her head held high, she gazed at the "riff-raff,"
with scornful curiosity. When Hippolyte had finished, Ivan Fedorovitch
shrugged his shoulders, and his wife looked him angrily up and down, as
if to demand the meaning of his movement. Then she turned to the prince.

"Thanks, prince, many thanks, eccentric friend of the family, for the
pleasant evening you have provided for us. I am sure you are quite
pleased that you have managed to mix us up with your extraordinary
affairs. It is quite enough, dear family friend; thank you for giving us
an opportunity of getting to know you so well."

She arranged her cloak with hands that trembled with anger as she waited
for the "riff-raff" to go. The cab which Lebedeff's son had gone to
fetch a quarter of an hour ago, by Doktorenko's order, arrived at that
moment. The general thought fit to put in a word after his wife.

"Really, prince, I hardly expected after--after all our friendly
intercourse--and you see, Lizabetha Prokofievna--"

"Papa, how can you?" cried Adelaida, walking quickly up to the prince
and holding out her hand.

He smiled absently at her; then suddenly he felt a burning sensation in
his ear as an angry voice whispered:

"If you do not turn those dreadful people out of the house this very
instant, I shall hate you all my life--all my life!" It was Aglaya. She
seemed almost in a frenzy, but she turned away before the prince could
look at her. However, there was no one left to turn out of the house,
for they had managed meanwhile to get Hippolyte into the cab, and it had
driven off.

"Well, how much longer is this going to last, Ivan Fedorovitch? What do
you think? Shall I soon be delivered from these odious youths?"

"My dear, I am quite ready; naturally... the prince."

Ivan Fedorovitch held out his hand to Muishkin, but ran after his wife,
who was leaving with every sign of violent indignation, before he had
time to shake it. Adelaida, her fiance, and Alexandra, said good-bye to
their host with sincere friendliness. Evgenie Pavlovitch did the same,
and he alone seemed in good spirits.

"What I expected has happened! But I am sorry, you poor fellow, that
you should have had to suffer for it," he murmured, with a most charming
smile.

Aglaya left without saying good-bye. But the evening was not to end
without a last adventure. An unexpected meeting was yet in store for
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

She had scarcely descended the terrace steps leading to the high road
that skirts the park at Pavlofsk, when suddenly there dashed by a smart
open carriage, drawn by a pair of beautiful white horses. Having passed
some ten yards beyond the house, the carriage suddenly drew up, and one
of the two ladies seated in it turned sharp round as though she had just
caught sight of some acquaintance whom she particularly wished to see.

"Evgenie Pavlovitch! Is that you?" cried a clear, sweet voice, which
caused the prince, and perhaps someone else, to tremble. "Well, I _am_
glad I've found you at last! I've sent to town for you twice today
myself! My messengers have been searching for you everywhere!"

Evgenie Pavlovitch stood on the steps like one struck by lightning.
Mrs. Epanchin stood still too, but not with the petrified expression of
Evgenie. She gazed haughtily at the audacious person who had addressed
her companion, and then turned a look of astonishment upon Evgenie
himself.

"There's news!" continued the clear voice. "You need not be anxious
about Kupferof's IOU's--Rogojin has bought them up. I persuaded him
to!--I dare say we shall settle Biscup too, so it's all right, you
see! _Au revoir_, tomorrow! And don't worry!" The carriage moved on, and
disappeared.

"The woman's mad!" cried Evgenie, at last, crimson with anger, and
looking confusedly around. "I don't know what she's talking about! What
IOU's? Who is she?" Mrs. Epanchin continued to watch his face for a
couple of seconds; then she marched briskly and haughtily away towards
her own house, the rest following her.

A minute afterwards, Evgenie Pavlovitch reappeared on the terrace, in
great agitation.

"Prince," he said, "tell me the truth; do you know what all this means?"

"I know nothing whatever about it!" replied the latter, who was,
himself, in a state of nervous excitement.

"No?"

"No?

"Well, nor do I!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing suddenly. "I haven't
the slightest knowledge of any such IOU's as she mentioned, I swear I
haven't--What's the matter, are you fainting?"

"Oh, no--no--I'm all right, I assure you!"

XI.

The anger of the Epanchin family was unappeased for three days. As usual
the prince reproached himself, and had expected punishment, but he was
inwardly convinced that Lizabetha Prokofievna could not be seriously
angry with him, and that she probably was more angry with herself. He
was painfully surprised, therefore, when three days passed with no word
from her. Other things also troubled and perplexed him, and one of these
grew more important in his eyes as the days went by. He had begun to
blame himself for two opposite tendencies--on the one hand to extreme,
almost "senseless," confidence in his fellows, on the other to a "vile,
gloomy suspiciousness."

By the end of the third day the incident of the eccentric lady and
Evgenie Pavlovitch had attained enormous and mysterious proportions in
his mind. He sorrowfully asked himself whether he had been the cause of
this new "monstrosity," or was it... but he refrained from saying who
else might be in fault. As for the letters N.P.B., he looked on that as
a harmless joke, a mere childish piece of mischief--so childish that
he felt it would be shameful, almost dishonourable, to attach any
importance to it.

The day after these scandalous events, however, the prince had the
honour of receiving a visit from Adelaida and her fiance, Prince S. They
came, ostensibly, to inquire after his health. They had wandered out for
a walk, and called in "by accident," and talked for almost the whole
of the time they were with him about a certain most lovely tree in the
park, which Adelaida had set her heart upon for a picture. This, and a
little amiable conversation on Prince S.'s part, occupied the time, and
not a word was said about last evening's episodes. At length Adelaida
burst out laughing, apologized, and explained that they had come
incognito; from which, and from the circumstance that they said nothing
about the prince's either walking back with them or coming to see them
later on, the latter inferred that he was in Mrs. Epanchin's black
books. Adelaida mentioned a watercolour that she would much like to show
him, and explained that she would either send it by Colia, or bring it
herself the next day--which to the prince seemed very suggestive.

At length, however, just as the visitors were on the point of departing,
Prince S. seemed suddenly to recollect himself. "Oh yes, by-the-by," he
said, "do you happen to know, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, who that lady
was who called out to Evgenie Pavlovitch last night, from the carriage?"

"It was Nastasia Philipovna," said the prince; "didn't you know that? I
cannot tell you who her companion was."

"But what on earth did she mean? I assure you it is a real riddle
to me--to me, and to others, too!" Prince S. seemed to be under the
influence of sincere astonishment.

"She spoke of some bills of Evgenie Pavlovitch's," said the prince,
simply, "which Rogojin had bought up from someone; and implied that
Rogojin would not press him."

"Oh, I heard that much, my dear fellow! But the thing is so impossibly
absurd! A man of property like Evgenie to give IOU's to a money-lender,
and to be worried about them! It is ridiculous. Besides, he cannot
possibly be on such intimate terms with Nastasia Philipovna as she gave
us to understand; that's the principal part of the mystery! He has given
me his word that he knows nothing whatever about the matter, and of
course I believe him. Well, the question is, my dear prince, do you know
anything about it? Has any sort of suspicion of the meaning of it come
across you?"

"No, I know nothing whatever about it. I assure you I had nothing at all
to do with it."

"Oh, prince, how strange you have become! I assure you, I hardly know
you for your old self. How can you suppose that I ever suggested you
could have had a finger in such a business? But you are not quite
yourself today, I can see." He embraced the prince, and kissed him.

"What do you mean, though," asked Muishkin, "'by such a business'? I
don't see any particular 'business' about it at all!"

"Oh, undoubtedly, this person wished somehow, and for some reason, to
do Evgenie Pavlovitch a bad turn, by attributing to him--before
witnesses--qualities which he neither has nor can have," replied Prince
S. drily enough.

Muiskhin looked disturbed, but continued to gaze intently and
questioningly into Prince S.'s face. The latter, however, remained
silent.

"Then it was not simply a matter of bills?" Muishkin said at last, with
some impatience. "It was not as she said?"

"But I ask you, my dear sir, how can there be anything in common between
Evgenie Pavlovitch, and--her, and again Rogojin? I tell you he is a man
of immense wealth--as I know for a fact; and he has further expectations
from his uncle. Simply Nastasia Philipovna--"

Prince S. paused, as though unwilling to continue talking about Nastasia
Philipovna.

"Then at all events he knows her!" remarked the prince, after a moment's
silence.

"Oh, that may be. He may have known her some time ago--two or three
years, at least. He used to know Totski. But it is impossible that
there should be any intimacy between them. She has not even been in the
place--many people don't even know that she has returned from Moscow! I
have only observed her carriage about for the last three days or so."

"It's a lovely carriage," said Adelaida.

"Yes, it was a beautiful turn-out, certainly!"

The visitors left the house, however, on no less friendly terms than
before. But the visit was of the greatest importance to the prince, from
his own point of view. Admitting that he had his suspicions, from
the moment of the occurrence of last night, perhaps even before, that
Nastasia had some mysterious end in view, yet this visit confirmed his
suspicions and justified his fears. It was all clear to him; Prince S.
was wrong, perhaps, in his view of the matter, but he was somewhere near
the truth, and was right in so far as that he understood there to be
an intrigue of some sort going on. Perhaps Prince S. saw it all more
clearly than he had allowed his hearers to understand. At all events,
nothing could be plainer than that he and Adelaida had come for the
express purpose of obtaining explanations, and that they suspected him
of being concerned in the affair. And if all this were so, then _she_ must
have some terrible object in view! What was it? There was no stopping
_her_, as Muishkin knew from experience, in the performance of anything
she had set her mind on! "Oh, she is mad, mad!" thought the poor prince.

But there were many other puzzling occurrences that day, which required
immediate explanation, and the prince felt very sad. A visit from Vera
Lebedeff distracted him a little. She brought the infant Lubotchka with
her as usual, and talked cheerfully for some time. Then came her younger
sister, and later the brother, who attended a school close by. He
