"What's that got to do with it?" asked the general, who loathed
Ferdishenko.

"Why, he must pay toll for his entrance," explained the latter.

"H'm! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko," said the general,
impatiently. This worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself
to the idea of meeting Ferdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.

"Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!" replied the other, smiling. "I have
special privileges."

"What do you mean by special privileges?"

"Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will
repeat the explanation to-day for your excellency's benefit. You see,
excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am
neither. As a kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for
it is a well-known fact that only stupid people tell 'the truth.' Added
to this, I am a spiteful man, just because I am not clever. If I am
offended or injured I bear it quite patiently until the man injuring
me meets with some misfortune. Then I remember, and take my revenge. I
return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin says. (Of course
he never does so himself.) Excellency, no doubt you recollect Kryloff's
fable, 'The Lion and the Ass'? Well now, that's you and I. That fable
was written precisely for us."

"You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko," growled the
general.

"What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place. When I
said just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of Kryloff's
fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the ass. Your
excellency is the lion of which the fable remarks:

  'A mighty lion, terror of the woods,
   Was shorn of his great prowess by old age.'

And I, your excellency, am the ass."

"I am of your opinion on that last point," said Ivan Fedorovitch, with
ill-concealed irritation.

All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was
premeditated, but after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to accept
him as a buffoon.

"If I am admitted and tolerated here," he had said one day, "it is
simply because I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive
such a man as I am? I quite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko,
be allowed to sit shoulder to shoulder with a clever man like Afanasy
Ivanovitch? There is one explanation, only one. I am given the position
because it is so entirely inconceivable!"

But these vulgarities seemed to please Nastasia Philipovna, although too
often they were both rude and offensive. Those who wished to go to her
house were forced to put up with Ferdishenko. Possibly the latter was
not mistaken in imagining that he was received simply in order to annoy
Totski, who disliked him extremely. Gania also was often made the butt
of the jester's sarcasms, who used this method of keeping in Nastasia
Philipovna's good graces.

"The prince will begin by singing us a fashionable ditty," remarked
Ferdishenko, and looked at the mistress of the house, to see what she
would say.

"I don't think so, Ferdishenko; please be quiet," answered Nastasia
Philipovna dryly.

"A-ah! if he is to be under special patronage, I withdraw my claws."

But Nastasia Philipovna had now risen and advanced to meet the prince.

"I was so sorry to have forgotten to ask you to come, when I saw you,"
she said, "and I am delighted to be able to thank you personally now,
and to express my pleasure at your resolution."

So saying she gazed into his eyes, longing to see whether she could make
any guess as to the explanation of his motive in coming to her house.
The prince would very likely have made some reply to her kind words, but
he was so dazzled by her appearance that he could not speak.

Nastasia noticed this with satisfaction. She was in full dress this
evening; and her appearance was certainly calculated to impress all
beholders. She took his hand and led him towards her other guests. But
just before they reached the drawing-room door, the prince stopped her,
and hurriedly and in great agitation whispered to her:

"You are altogether perfection; even your pallor and thinness are
perfect; one could not wish you otherwise. I did so wish to come and see
you. I--forgive me, please--"

"Don't apologize," said Nastasia, laughing; "you spoil the whole
originality of the thing. I think what they say about you must be true,
that you are so original.--So you think me perfection, do you?"

"Yes."

"H'm! Well, you may be a good reader of riddles but you are wrong
_there_, at all events. I'll remind you of this, tonight."

Nastasia introduced the prince to her guests, to most of whom he was
already known.

Totski immediately made some amiable remark. All seemed to brighten up at
once, and the conversation became general. Nastasia made the prince sit
down next to herself.

"Dear me, there's nothing so very curious about the prince dropping in,
after all," remarked Ferdishenko.

"It's quite a clear case," said the hitherto silent Gania. "I have
watched the prince almost all day, ever since the moment when he first
saw Nastasia Philipovna's portrait, at General Epanchin's. I remember
thinking at the time what I am now pretty sure of; and what, I may say
in passing, the prince confessed to myself."

Gania said all this perfectly seriously, and without the slightest
appearance of joking; indeed, he seemed strangely gloomy.

"I did not confess anything to you," said the prince, blushing. "I only
answered your question."

"Bravo! That's frank, at any rate!" shouted Ferdishenko, and there was
general laughter.

"Oh prince, prince! I never should have thought it of you;" said General
Epanchin. "And I imagined you a philosopher! Oh, you silent fellows!"

"Judging from the fact that the prince blushed at this innocent joke,
like a young girl, I should think that he must, as an honourable man,
harbour the noblest intentions," said the old toothless schoolmaster,
most unexpectedly; he had not so much as opened his mouth before.
This remark provoked general mirth, and the old fellow himself laughed
loudest of the lot, but ended with a stupendous fit of coughing.

Nastasia Philipovna, who loved originality and drollery of all kinds,
was apparently very fond of this old man, and rang the bell for more tea
to stop his coughing. It was now half-past ten o'clock.

"Gentlemen, wouldn't you like a little champagne now?" she asked. "I
have it all ready; it will cheer us up--do now--no ceremony!"

This invitation to drink, couched, as it was, in such informal terms,
came very strangely from Nastasia Philipovna. Her usual entertainments
were not quite like this; there was more style about them. However, the
wine was not refused; each guest took a glass excepting Gania, who drank
nothing.

It was extremely difficult to account for Nastasia's strange condition
of mind, which became more evident each moment, and which none could
avoid noticing.

She took her glass, and vowed she would empty it three times that
evening. She was hysterical, and laughed aloud every other minute
with no apparent reason--the next moment relapsing into gloom and
thoughtfulness.

Some of her guests suspected that she must be ill; but concluded at last
that she was expecting something, for she continued to look at her watch
impatiently and unceasingly; she was most absent and strange.

"You seem to be a little feverish tonight," said the actress.

"Yes; I feel quite ill. I have been obliged to put on this shawl--I feel
so cold," replied Nastasia. She certainly had grown very pale, and every
now and then she tried to suppress a trembling in her limbs.

"Had we not better allow our hostess to retire?" asked Totski of the
general.

"Not at all, gentlemen, not at all! Your presence is absolutely
necessary to me tonight," said Nastasia, significantly.

As most of those present were aware that this evening a certain very
important decision was to be taken, these words of Nastasia Philipovna's
appeared to be fraught with much hidden interest. The general and Totski
exchanged looks; Gania fidgeted convulsively in his chair.

"Let's play at some game!" suggested the actress.

"I know a new and most delightful game, added Ferdishenko.

"What is it?" asked the actress.

"Well, when we tried it we were a party of people, like this, for
instance; and somebody proposed that each of us, without leaving his
place at the table, should relate something about himself. It had to be
something that he really and honestly considered the very worst action
he had ever committed in his life. But he was to be honest--that was the
chief point! He wasn't to be allowed to lie."

"What an extraordinary idea!" said the general.

"That's the beauty of it, general!"

"It's a funny notion," said Totski, "and yet quite natural--it's only a
new way of boasting."

"Perhaps that is just what was so fascinating about it."

"Why, it would be a game to cry over--not to laugh at!" said the
actress.

"Did it succeed?" asked Nastasia Philipovna. "Come, let's try it, let's
try it; we really are not quite so jolly as we might be--let's try it!
We may like it; it's original, at all events!"

"Yes," said Ferdishenko; "it's a good idea--come along--the men begin.
Of course no one need tell a story if he prefers to be disobliging. We
must draw lots! Throw your slips of paper, gentlemen, into this hat, and
the prince shall draw for turns. It's a very simple game; all you have
to do is to tell the story of the worst action of your life. It's as
simple as anything. I'll prompt anyone who forgets the rules!"

No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned some objected,
but faintly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia's wishes; for this new idea
seemed to be rather well received by her. She was still in an excited,
hysterical state, laughing convulsively at nothing and everything. Her
eyes were blazing, and her cheeks showed two bright red spots against
the white. The melancholy appearance of some of her guests seemed to add
to her sarcastic humour, and perhaps the very cynicism and cruelty of
the game proposed by Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events she was
attracted by the idea, and gradually her guests came round to her side;
the thing was original, at least, and might turn out to be amusing. "And
supposing it's something that one--one can't speak about before ladies?"
asked the timid and silent young man.

"Why, then of course, you won't say anything about it. As if there
are not plenty of sins to your score without the need of those!" said
Ferdishenko.

"But I really don't know which of my actions is the worst," said the
lively actress.

"Ladies are exempted if they like."

"And how are you to know that one isn't lying? And if one lies the whole
point of the game is lost," said Gania.

"Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one's friends lie! Besides
you needn't be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst action is
without the need of any lying on your part. Only think, gentlemen,"--and
Ferdishenko here grew quite enthusiastic, "only think with what eyes we
shall observe one another tomorrow, after our tales have been told!"

"But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?" asked Totski. "You
don't really mean us to play this game."

"Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood," said
Nastasia, smiling.

"But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of
this kind of thing?" persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy. "I
assure you it can't be a success."

"And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I
stole three roubles."

"Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it
seemed like truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila
Ardalionovitch has said, the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all
point out of the game. It seems to me that sincerity, on the other hand,
is only possible if combined with a kind of bad taste that would be
utterly out of place here."

"How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me," cried
Ferdishenko. "You will remark, gentleman, that in saying that I
could not recount the story of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy
Ivanovitch has very ingeniously implied that I am not capable of
thieving--(it would have been bad taste to say so openly); and all the
time he is probably firmly convinced, in his own mind, that I am very
well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to business! Put in your slips,
ladies and gentlemen--is yours in, Mr. Totski? So--then we are all
ready; now prince, draw, please." The prince silently put his hand into
the hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenko was first, then Ptitsin, then
the general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Gania, and so on; the
ladies did not draw.

"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" cried Ferdishenko. "I did so hope the prince would
come out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose I
must set a good example! What vexes me much is that I am such an
insignificant creature that it matters nothing to anybody whether I have
done bad actions or not! Besides, which am I to choose? It's an _embarras
de richesse_. Shall I tell how I became a thief on one occasion only, to
convince Afanasy Ivanovitch that it is possible to steal without being a
thief?"

"Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don't make unnecessary preface, or you'll
never finish," said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how irritable and
cross she had become since her last burst of laughter; but none the less
obstinately did she stick to her absurd whim about this new game. Totski
sat looking miserable enough. The general lingered over his champagne,
and seemed to be thinking of some story for the time when his turn
should come.

XIV.

"I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna," began Ferdishenko, "and therefore
I talk too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr. Totski or the
general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as they
have. Now, prince, what do you think?--are there not far more thieves
than honest men in this world? Don't you think we may say there does
not exist a single person so honest that he has never stolen anything
whatever in his life?"

"What a silly idea," said the actress. "Of course it is not the case. I
have never stolen anything, for one."

"H'm! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen anything--agreed.
But how about the prince, now--look how he is blushing!"

"I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate," said the prince,
who had certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.

"Ferdishenko--either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your own
business. You exhaust all patience," cuttingly and irritably remarked
Nastasia Philipovna.

"Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid
and absurd to tell you.

"I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain
why. It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka's country house, one Sunday. He
had a dinner party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over their
wine. It struck me to ask the daughter of the house to play something
on the piano; so I passed through the corner room to join the ladies. In
that room, on Maria Ivanovna's writing-table, I observed a three-rouble
note. She must have taken it out for some purpose, and left it lying
there. There was no one about. I took up the note and put it in my
pocket; why, I can't say. I don't know what possessed me to do it, but
it was done, and I went quickly back to the dining-room and reseated
myself at the dinner-table. I sat and waited there in a great state of
excitement. I talked hard, and told lots of stories, and laughed like
mad; then I joined the ladies.

"In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were
being put under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I
exhibited the greatest interest and sympathy, and I remember that
poor Daria quite lost her head, and that I began assuring her, before
everyone, that I would guarantee her forgiveness on the part of her
mistress, if she would confess her guilt. They all stared at the girl,
and I remember a wonderful attraction in the reflection that here was I
sermonizing away, with the money in my own pocket all the while. I went
and spent the three roubles that very evening at a restaurant. I went in
and asked for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I wanted to be rid of
the money.

"I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not
repeat the performance--believe it or not as you please. There--that's
all."

"Only, of course that's not nearly your worst action," said the actress,
with evident dislike in her face.

"That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action," remarked Totski.

"And what about the maid?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, with undisguised
contempt.

"Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It's a very strict
household, there!"

"And you allowed it?"

"I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess
next day," laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the
disagreeable impression which his story had made on all parties.

"How mean you were!" said Nastasia.

"Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect
the story to come out goody-goody! One's worst actions always are mean.
We shall see what the general has to say for himself now. All is not
gold that glitters, you know; and because a man keeps his carriage he
need not be specially virtuous, I assure you, all sorts of people keep
carriages. And by what means?"

In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself;
his whole face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had
expected much better success for his story. These little errors of taste
on Ferdishenko's part occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled with
rage, and looked fixedly at him, whereupon he relapsed into alarmed
silence. He realized that he had gone a little too far.

"Had we not better end this game?" asked Totski.

"It's my turn, but I plead exemption," said Ptitsin.

"You don't care to oblige us?" asked Nastasia.

"I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can
play this game."

"Then, general, it's your turn," continued Nastasia Philipovna, "and if
you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which will disappoint me
very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain 'page of my
own life.' I am only waiting for you and Afanasy Ivanovitch to have your
turns, for I require the support of your example," she added, smiling.

"Oh, if you put it in that way," cried the general, excitedly, "I'm
ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess that I
prepared a little story in anticipation of my turn."

Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and
irritability were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully
alarmed to hear her promise a revelation out of her own life.

"I, like everyone else," began the general, "have committed certain not
altogether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my life.
But the strangest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider the
little anecdote which I am now about to give you as a confession of
the worst of my 'bad actions.' It is thirty-five years since it all
happened, and yet I cannot to this very day recall the circumstances
without, as it were, a sudden pang at the heart.

"It was a silly affair--I was an ensign at the time. You know
ensigns--their blood is boiling water, their circumstances generally
penurious. Well, I had a servant Nikifor who used to do everything for
me in my quarters, economized and managed for me, and even laid hands on
anything he could find (belonging to other people), in order to augment
our household goods; but a faithful, honest fellow all the same.

"I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in
a small town. I was quartered at an old widow's house, a lieutenant's
widow of eighty years of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden
house, and had not even a servant, so poor was she.

"Her relations had all died off--her husband was dead and buried forty
years since; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to
three years ago, was dead too; so that she was quite alone.

"Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish
that there was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a
fowl of mine; the business is a mystery to this day; but it could have
been no one but herself. I requested to be quartered somewhere else,
and was shifted to the other end of the town, to the house of a merchant
with a large family, and a long beard, as I remember him. Nikifor and I
were delighted to go; but the old lady was not pleased at our departure.

"Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor
says to me: 'We oughtn't to have left our tureen with the old lady, I've
nothing to serve the soup in.'

"I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said,
we had broken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it; she
had declared that I had so arranged the matter with herself.

"This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever
heat; I jumped up, and away I flew.

"I arrived at the old woman's house beside myself. She was sitting in
a corner all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a
clap of thunder. 'You old wretch!' I yelled and all that sort of thing,
in real Russian style. Well, when I began cursing at her, a strange
thing happened. I looked at her, and she stared back with her eyes
starting out of her head, but she did not say a word. She seemed to
sway about as she sat, and looked and looked at me in the strangest
way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and looked closer at her, asked her
questions, but not a word could I get out of her. The flies were buzzing
about the room and only this sound broke the silence; the sun was
setting outside; I didn't know what to make of it, so I went away.

"Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major's, so that it
was some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor met
me. 'Have you heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?' '_dead_, when?' 'Oh,
an hour and a half ago.' That meant nothing more nor less than that she
was dying at the moment when I pounced on her and began abusing her.

"This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old
woman at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I
went to her funeral, and as time went on I thought more and more about
her. I said to myself, 'This woman, this human being, lived to a great
age. She had children, a husband and family, friends and relations; her
household was busy and cheerful; she was surrounded by smiling faces;
and then suddenly they are gone, and she is left alone like a solitary
fly... like a fly, cursed with the burden of her age. At last, God calls
her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely summer's evening, my little old
woman passes away--a thought, you will notice, which offers much food
for reflection--and behold! instead of tears and prayers to start her
on her last journey, she has insults and jeers from a young ensign, who
stands before her with his hands in his pockets, making a terrible row
about a soup tureen!' Of course I was to blame, and even now that I have
time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor old thing no less.
I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was not really
responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at that moment?
But the more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight of it upon my
mind; and I never got quite rid of the impression until I put a couple
of old women into an almshouse and kept them there at my own expense.
There, that's all. I repeat I dare say I have committed many a grievous
sin in my day; but I cannot help always looking back upon this as the
worst action I have ever perpetrated."

"H'm! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one of
your noblest deeds," said Ferdishenko. "Ferdishenko is 'done.'"

"Dear me, general," said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, "I really never
imagined you had such a good heart."

The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once
more to the champagne.

It was now Totski's turn, and his story was awaited with great
curiosity--while all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though
anticipating that his revelation must be connected somehow with her.
Nastasia, during the whole of his story, pulled at the lace trimming of
her sleeve, and never once glanced at the speaker. Totski was a handsome
man, rather stout, with a very polite and dignified manner. He was
always well dressed, and his linen was exquisite. He had plump white
hands, and wore a magnificent diamond ring on one finger.

"What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion," he
began, "is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action of
my life. In such circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt. One's
conscience very soon informs one what is the proper narrative to tell. I
admit, that among the many silly and thoughtless actions of my life, the
memory of one comes prominently forward and reminds me that it lay long
like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years since, I paid a visit to
Platon Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been elected marshal
of the nobility, and had come there with his young wife for the winter
holidays. Anfisa Alexeyevna's birthday came off just then, too, and
there were two balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils' beautiful work,
_La Dame aux Camélias_--a novel which I consider imperishable--had just
come into fashion. In the provinces all the ladies were in raptures over
it, those who had read it, at least. Camellias were all the fashion.
Everyone inquired for them, everybody wanted them; and a grand lot of
camellias are to be got in a country town--as you all know--and two
balls to provide for!

"Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna.
I don't know whether there was anything--I mean I don't know whether
he could possibly have indulged in any hope. The poor fellow was beside
himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countess Sotski and Sophia
Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia bouquets.
Anfisa wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was
driven desperate to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa's
rival snapped up the only red camellias to be had in the place, from
under Platon's nose, and Platon--wretched man--was done for. Now if
Peter had only been able to step in at this moment with a red bouquet,
his little hopes might have made gigantic strides. A woman's gratitude
under such circumstances would have been boundless--but it was
practically an impossibility.

"The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. 'What is it?'
I ask. 'I've found them, Eureka!' 'No! where, where?' 'At Ekshaisk (a
little town fifteen miles off) there's a rich old merchant, who keeps
a lot of canaries, has no children, and he and his wife are devoted to
flowers. He's got some camellias.' 'And what if he won't let you have
them?' 'I'll go on my knees and implore till I get them. I won't go
away.' 'When shall you start?' 'Tomorrow morning at five o'clock.' 'Go
on,' I said, 'and good luck to you.'

"I was glad for the poor fellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of
me somehow. I don't know how. It was nearly two in the morning. I rang
the bell and ordered the coachman to be waked up and sent to me. He
came. I gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him to get the
carriage ready at once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in and
off we went.

"By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and
soon after six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf's.

"'Camellias!' I said, 'father, save me, save me, let me have some
camellias!' He was a tall, grey old man--a terrible-looking old
gentleman. 'Not a bit of it,' he says. 'I won't.' Down I went on my
knees. 'Don't say so, don't--think what you're doing!' I cried; 'it's a
matter of life and death!' 'If that's the case, take them,' says he.
So up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red camellias! He had a whole
greenhouse full of them--lovely ones. The old fellow sighs. I pull out a
hundred roubles. 'No, no!' says he, 'don't insult me that way.' 'Oh, if
that's the case, give it to the village hospital,' I say. 'Ah,' he says,
'that's quite a different matter; that's good of you and generous. I'll
pay it in there for you with pleasure.' I liked that old fellow, Russian
to the core, _de la vraie souche_. I went home in raptures, but took
another road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on arriving I sent up
the bouquet for Anfisa to see when she awoke.

"You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who
had almost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him,
wept on my shoulder. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.

"I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready
to meet him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain fever
and convulsions. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he went
off to the Crimea, and there he was shot.

"I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why
did I do it? I was not in love with her myself; I'm afraid it was simply
mischief--pure 'cussedness' on my part.

"If I hadn't seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have been
alive now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and
never have gone to fight the Turks."

Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its
commencement.

Nastasia Philipovna's eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way,
now; and her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his
story.

All present watched both of them with curiosity.

"You were right, Totski," said Nastasia, "it is a dull game and a stupid
one. I'll just tell my story, as I promised, and then we'll play cards."

"Yes, but let's have the story first!" cried the general.

"Prince," said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to Muishkin,
"here are my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish to marry
me off. Tell me what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you decide, so
shall it be."

Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present
started and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.

"Marry whom?" asked the prince, faintly.

"Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin," said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.

There were a few seconds of dead silence.

The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight
seemed to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.

"N-no! don't marry him!" he whispered at last, drawing his breath with
an effort.

"So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch," she spoke solemnly and
forcibly, "you hear the prince's decision? Take it as my decision; and
let that be the end of the matter for good and all."

"Nastasia Philipovna!" cried Totski, in a quaking voice.

"Nastasia Philipovna!" said the general, in persuasive but agitated
tones.

Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what
was coming next.

"Well, gentlemen!" she continued, gazing around in apparent
astonishment; "what do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so
upset?"

"But--recollect, Nastasia Philipovna." stammered Totski, "you gave a
promise, quite a free one, and--and you might have spared us this. I am
confused and bewildered, I know; but, in a word, at such a moment, and
before company, and all so-so-irregular, finishing off a game with a
serious matter like this, a matter of honour, and of heart, and--"

"I don't follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head. In
the first place, what do you mean by 'before company'? Isn't the company
good enough for you? And what's all that about 'a game'? I wished to
tell my little story, and I told it! Don't you like it? You heard what
I said to the prince? 'As you decide, so it shall be!' If he had said
'yes,' I should have given my consent! But he said 'no,' so I refused.
Here was my whole life hanging on his one word! Surely I was serious
enough?"

"The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the
deuce is the prince?" cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no
longer.

"The prince has this to do with it--that I see in him for the first
time in all my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and
I trust him. He trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!"

"It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the
great delicacy with which she has treated me," said Gania, as pale as
death, and with quivering lips. "That is my plain duty, of course; but
the prince--what has he to do in the matter?"

"I see what you are driving at," said Nastasia Philipovna. "You imply
that the prince is after the seventy-five thousand roubles--I quite
understand you. Mr. Totski, I forgot to say, 'Take your seventy-five
thousand roubles'--I don't want them. I let you go free for nothing--take
your freedom! You must need it. Nine years and three months' captivity
is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start afresh--today I am a free
agent for the first time in my life.

"General, you must take your pearls back, too--give them to your
wife--here they are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and
then there'll be no more of these pleasant little social gatherings,
ladies and gentlemen."

So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.

"Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!"

The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up
in bewildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily
to her wild, disconnected sentences. All felt that something had
happened, something had gone very far wrong indeed, but no one could
make head or tail of the matter.

At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock
at the door--exactly similar to the one which had startled the company
at Gania's house in the afternoon.

"Ah, ah! here's the climax at last, at half-past twelve!" cried Nastasia
Philipovna. "Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is about to
happen."

So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips. She
sat quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.

"Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it," muttered
Ptitsin to himself.

XV.

Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.

"Goodness knows what it means, ma'am," she said. "There is a whole
collection of men come--all tipsy--and want to see you. They say that
'it's Rogojin, and she knows all about it.'"

"It's all right, Katia, let them all in at once."

"Surely not _all_, ma'am? They seem so disorderly--it's dreadful to see
them."

"Yes _all_, Katia, all--every one of them. Let them in, or they'll come
in whether you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are making! Perhaps
you are offended, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests in your
presence? I am very sorry, and ask your forgiveness, but it cannot be
helped--and I should be very grateful if you could all stay and witness
this climax. However, just as you please, of course."

The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the
episode; but it was clear enough that all this had been pre-arranged and
expected by Nastasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in trying to
stop her now--for she was little short of insane.

Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen.
There was nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm. There were
but two ladies present; one of whom was the lively actress, who was not
easily frightened, and the other the silent German beauty who, it turned
out, did not understand a word of Russian, and seemed to be as stupid as
she was lovely.

Her acquaintances invited her to their "At Homes" because she was so
decorative. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture,
or vase, or statue, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of
Rogojin's friends; Ferdishenko was as much at home as a fish in the sea,
Gania, not yet recovered from his amazement, appeared to be chained to
a pillory. The old professor did not in the least understand what was
happening; but when he noticed how extremely agitated the mistress of
the house, and her friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and trembled with
fright: but he would rather have died than leave Nastasia Philipovna at
such a crisis, for he loved her as if she were his own granddaughter.
Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having anything to do with the
affair, but he was too much interested to leave, in spite of the mad
turn things had taken; and a few words that had dropped from the lips
of Nastasia puzzled him so much, that he felt he could not go without
an explanation. He resolved therefore, to see it out, and to adopt the
attitude of silent spectator, as most suited to his dignity. General
Epanchin alone determined to depart. He was annoyed at the manner in
which his gift had been returned, as though he had condescended, under
the influence of passion, to place himself on a level with Ptitsin and
Ferdishenko, his self-respect and sense of duty now returned together
with a consciousness of what was due to his social rank and official
importance. In short, he plainly showed his conviction that a man in his
position could have nothing to do with Rogojin and his companions. But
Nastasia interrupted him at his first words.

"Ah, general!" she cried, "I was forgetting! If I had only foreseen
this unpleasantness! I won't insist on keeping you against your will,
although I should have liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am
most grateful to you for your visit, and flattering attention... but if
you are afraid..."

"Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna," interrupted the general, with
chivalric generosity. "To whom are you speaking? I have remained until
now simply because of my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only
afraid that the carpets may be ruined, and the furniture smashed!... You
should shut the door on the lot, in my opinion. But I confess that I am
extremely curious to see how it ends."

"Rogojin!" announced Ferdishenko.

"What do you think about it?" said the general in a low voice to Totski.
"Is she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word .... eh?"

"I've always said she was predisposed to it," whispered Afanasy
Ivanovitch slyly. "Perhaps it is a fever!"

Since their visit to Gania's home, Rogojin's followers had been
increased by two new recruits--a dissolute old man, the hero of some
ancient scandal, and a retired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was
told of the former. He possessed, it was said, a set of false teeth, and
one day when he wanted money for a drinking orgy, he pawned them, and
was never able to reclaim them! The officer appeared to be a rival of
the gentleman who was so proud of his fists. He was known to none of
Rogojin's followers, but as they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood
begging, he had joined their ranks. His claim for the charity he desired
seemed based on the fact that in the days of his prosperity he had given
away as much as fifteen roubles at a time. The rivals seemed more than
a little jealous of one another. The athlete appeared injured at the
admission of the "beggar" into the company. By nature taciturn, he now
merely growled occasionally like a bear, and glared contemptuously
upon the "beggar," who, being somewhat of a man of the world, and a
diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear's good graces.
He was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless was conscious
that he must tread warily. Gently and without argument he alluded to
the advantages of the English style in boxing, and showed himself a
firm believer in Western institutions. The athlete's lips curled
disdainfully, and without honouring his adversary with a formal denial,
he exhibited, as if by accident, that peculiarly Russian object--an
enormous fist, clenched, muscular, and covered with red hairs! The sight
of this pre-eminently national attribute was enough to convince anybody,
without words, that it was a serious matter for those who should happen
to come into contact with it.

None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended
visit to Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent
his followers from drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the
excitement of this chaotic day--the strangest day of his life--had
affected him so that he was in a dazed, wild condition, which almost
resembled drunkenness.

He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked
in an agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had
worked so hard from five o'clock until eleven, that they actually had
collected a hundred thousand roubles for him, but at such terrific
expense, that the rate of interest was only mentioned among them in
whispers and with bated breath.

As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him with
mingled self-assertion and timidity. They were specially frightened of
Nastasia Philipovna herself, for some reason.

Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further
ceremony, the elegant and irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But
the party led by the athlete, without openly showing their hostile
intentions, silently nursed contempt and even hatred for Nastasia
Philipovna, and marched into her house as they would have marched into
an enemy's fortress. Arrived there, the luxury of the rooms seemed to
inspire them with a kind of respect, not unmixed with alarm. So many
things were entirely new to their experience--the choice furniture, the
pictures, the great statue of Venus. They followed their chief into the
salon, however, with a kind of impudent curiosity. There, the sight of
General Epanchin among the guests, caused many of them to beat a hasty
retreat into the adjoining room, the "boxer" and "beggar" being among
the first to go. A few only, of whom Lebedeff made one, stood their
ground; he had contrived to walk side by side with Rogojin, for he quite
understood the importance of a man who had a fortune of a million odd
roubles, and who at this moment carried a hundred thousand in his hand.
It may be added that the whole company, not excepting Lebedeff, had the
vaguest idea of the extent of their powers, and of how far they could
safely go. At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was on their
side; at others he tried uneasily to remember various cheering and
reassuring articles of the Civil Code.

Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon Nastasia,
stopped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it was clear
that his heart was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing intently, but
timidly, for a few seconds. Suddenly, as though bereft of his senses, he
moved forward, staggering helplessly, towards the table. On his way he
collided against Ptitsin's chair, and put his dirty foot on the lace
skirt of the silent lady's dress; but he neither apologized for this,
nor even noticed it.

On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object, which
he had carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper packet,
some six or seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length, wrapped in
an old newspaper, and tied round three or four times with string.

Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as
though awaiting his sentence.

His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a new
silk handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened with a
huge diamond pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty forefinger.

Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the
band waited about near the door.

The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at
this unusual and disorderly scene.

"What is that?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at Rogojin,
and indicating the paper packet.

"A hundred thousand," replied the latter, almost in a whisper.

"Oh! so he kept his word--there's a man for you! Well, sit down,
please--take that chair. I shall have something to say to you presently.
Who are all these with you? The same party? Let them come in and sit
down. There's room on that sofa, there are some chairs and there's
another sofa! Well, why don't they sit down?"

Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at this
point, and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the hint
and sat down, as far as they could from the table, however; feeling
braver in proportion to their distance from Nastasia.

Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon
stood up again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began
to look around him and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he smiled
venomously and muttered to himself, "Look at that!"

He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with
very little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated
beside Nastasia Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for
a long while, and was clearly amazed. He could not account for the
prince's presence there. It was not in the least surprising that Rogojin
should be, at this time, in a more or less delirious condition; for not
to speak of the excitements of the day, he had spent the night before in
the train, and had not slept more than a wink for forty-eight hours.

"This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles," said Nastasia
Philipovna, addressing the company in general, "here, in this dirty
parcel. This afternoon Rogojin yelled, like a madman, that he would
bring me a hundred thousand in the evening, and I have been waiting for
him all the while. He was bargaining for me, you know; first he offered
me eighteen thousand; then he rose to forty, and then to a hundred
thousand. And he has kept his word, see! My goodness, how white he is!
All this happened this afternoon, at Gania's. I had gone to pay his
mother a visit--my future family, you know! And his sister said to my
very face, surely somebody will turn this shameless creature out. After
which she spat in her brother Gania's face--a girl of character, that!"

"Nastasia Philipovna!" began the general, reproachfully. He was
beginning to put his own interpretation on the affair.

"Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have
I been sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years
like a statue of inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all
admirers, like a silly little idiot! Now, there's this man, who comes
and pays down his hundred thousand on the table, before you all, in
spite of my five years of innocence and proud virtue, and I dare be
sworn he has his sledge outside waiting to carry me off. He values me
at a hundred thousand! I see you are still angry with me, Gania!
Why, surely you never really wished to take _me_ into your family? _me_,
Rogojin's mistress! What did the prince say just now?"

"I never said you were Rogojin's mistress--you are _not!_" said the
prince, in trembling accents.

"Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!" cried the actress, impatiently, "do
be calm, dear! If it annoys you so--all this--do go away and rest! Of
course you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of his
hundred thousand roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house;
that's the way to treat him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it
were my business, I'd soon clear them all out!"

The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable. She was
very angry now.

"Don't be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!" laughed Nastasia. "I was not angry
when I spoke; I wasn't reproaching Gania. I don't know how it was that I
ever could have indulged the whim of entering an honest family like his.
I saw his mother--and kissed her hand, too. I came and stirred up all
that fuss, Gania, this afternoon, on purpose to see how much you could
swallow--you surprised me, my friend--you did, indeed. Surely you could
not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those you knew the general was
going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And Rogojin! Why, in
your own house and before your own brother and sister, he bargained with
me! Yet you could come here and expect to be betrothed to me before you
left the house! You almost brought your sister, too. Surely what Rogojin
said about you is not really true: that you would crawl all the way to
the other end of the town, on hands and knees, for three roubles?"

"Yes, he would!" said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute
conviction.

"H'm! and he receives a good salary, I'm told. Well, what should you get
but disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your family
(for I know very well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe now that a
man like you would murder anyone for money--sharpen a razor and come
up behind his best friend and cut his throat like a sheep--I've read
of such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowadays. No, no! I may be
shameless, but you are far worse. I don't say a word about that other--"

"Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and
delicate of speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are
saying," cried the general, wringing his hands in real grief.

"I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you know--it's my
birthday! I have long looked forward to this happy occasion. Daria
Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux Camelias,
sitting there laughing at us?"

"I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all my
attention," said Totski, with dignity.

"Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go
free? Is he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be--nothing
particular. He thinks I am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept
me like a countess. Money--my word! What a lot of money he spent over
me! And he tried to find me an honest husband first, and then this
Gania, here. And what do you think? All these five years I did not
live with him, and yet I took his money, and considered I was quite
justified.

"You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true,
it is an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long ago,
not Gania--Oh, no!--but that would have been abominable too.
