"Lebyadkin? Filipovs' house? I have heard something.... Thank you, Nikon
Semyonitch. But who is this Lebyadkin?"

"He calls himself a captain, a man, it must be said, not over careful
in his behaviour. And no doubt this is his sister. She must have escaped
from under control," Nikon Semyonitch went on, dropping his voice, and
glancing significantly at Varvara Petrovna.

"I understand. Thank you, Nikon Semyonitch. Your name is Mlle.
Lebyadkin?"

"No, my name's not Lebyadkin."

"Then perhaps your brother's name is Lebyadkin?"

"My brother's name is Lebyadkin."

"This is what I'll do, I'll take you with me now, my dear, and you shall
be driven from me to your family. Would you like to go with me?"

"Ach, I should!" cried Mlle. Lebyadkin, clasping her hands.

"Auntie, auntie, take me with you too!" the voice of Lizaveta Nikolaevna
cried suddenly.

I must observe that Lizaveta Nikolaevna had come to the cathedral with
the governor's wife, while Praskovya Ivanovna had by the doctor's
orders gone for a drive in her carriage, taking Mavriky Nikolaevitch
to entertain her. Liza suddenly left the governor's wife and ran up to
Varvara Petrovna.

"My dear, you know I'm always glad to have you, but what will your
mother say?" Varvara Petrovna began majestically, but she became
suddenly confused, noticing Liza's extraordinary agitation.

"Auntie, auntie, I must come with you!" Liza implored, kissing Varvara
Petrovna.

_"Mais qu'avez vous donc, Lise?"_ the governor's wife asked with
expressive wonder.

"Ah, forgive me, darling, _chère cousine,_ I'm going to auntie's."

Liza turned in passing to her unpleasantly surprised _chère cousine_, and
kissed her twice.

"And tell maman to follow me to auntie's directly; maman meant, fully
meant to come and see you, she said so this morning herself, I forgot to
tell you," Liza pattered on. "I beg your pardon, don't be angry, _Julie,
chère...cousine...._Auntie, I'm ready!"

"If you don't take me with you, auntie, I'll run after your carriage,
screaming," she whispered rapidly and despairingly in Varvara Petrovna's
ear; it was lucky that no one heard. Varvara Petrovna positively
staggered back, and bent her penetrating gaze on the mad girl. That gaze
settled everything. She made up her mind to take Liza with her.

"We must put an end to this!" broke from her lips. "Very well, I'll
take you with pleasure, Liza," she added aloud, "if Yulia Mihailovna
is willing to let you come, of course." With a candid air and
straightforward dignity she addressed the governor's wife directly.

"Oh, certainly, I don't want to deprive her of such a pleasure
especially as I am myself..." Yulia Mihailovna lisped with amazing
affability--"I myself... know well what a fantastic, wilful little head
it is!" Yulia Mihailovna gave a charming smile.

"I thank you extremely," said Varvara Petrovna, with a courteous and
dignified bow.

"And I am the more gratified," Yulia Mihailovna went on, lisping almost
rapturously, flushing all over with agreeable excitement, "that, apart
from the pleasure of being with you Liza should be carried away by such
an excellent, I may say lofty, feeling... of compassion..." (she
glanced at the "unhappy creature") "and... and at the very portal of the
temple...."

"Such a feeling does you honour," Varvara Petrovna approved
magnificently. Yulia Mihailovna impulsively held out her hand and
Varvara Petrovna with perfect readiness touched it with her fingers. The
general effect was excellent, the faces of some of those present beamed
with pleasure, some bland and insinuating smiles were to be seen.

In short it was made manifest to every one in the town that it was not
Yulia Mihailovna who had up till now neglected Varvara Petrovna in not
calling upon her, but on the contrary that Varvara Petrovna had "kept
Yulia Mihailovna within bounds at a distance, while the latter would
have hastened to pay her a visit, going on foot perhaps if necessary,
had she been fully assured that Varvara Petrovna would not turn her
away." And Varvara Petrovna's prestige was enormously increased.

"Get in, my dear." Varvara Petrovna motioned Mlle. Lebyadkin towards the
carriage which had driven up.

The "unhappy creature" hurried gleefully to the carriage door, and there
the footman lifted her in.

"What! You're lame!" cried Varvara Petrovna, seeming quite alarmed,
and she turned pale. (Every one noticed it at the time, but did not
understand it.)

The carriage rolled away. Varvara Petrovna's house was very near
the cathedral. Liza told me afterwards that Miss Lebyadkin laughed
hysterically for the three minutes that the drive lasted, while Varvara
Petrovna sat "as though in a mesmeric sleep." Liza's own expression.




CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT


VARVARA PETROVNA rang the bell and threw herself into an easy chair by
the window.

"Sit here, my dear." She motioned Marya Timofyevna to a seat in the
middle of the room, by a large round table. "Stepan Trofimovitch,
what is the meaning of this? See, see, look at this woman, what is the
meaning of it?"

"I... I..." faltered Stepan Trofimovitch.

But a footman came in.

"A cup of coffee at once, we must have it as quickly as possible! Keep
the horses!"

_"Mais, chère et excellente amie, dans quelle inquiétude..."_ Stepan
Trofimovitch exclaimed in a dying voice.

"Ach! French! French! I can see at once that it's the highest society,"
cried Marya Timofyevna, clapping her hands, ecstatically preparing
herself to listen to a conversation in French. Varvara Petrovna stared
at her almost in dismay.

We all sat in silence, waiting to see how it would end. Shatov did not
lift up his head, and Stepan Trofimovitch was overwhelmed with confusion
as though it were all his fault; the perspiration stood out on his
temples. I glanced at Liza (she was sitting in the corner almost beside
Shatov). Her eyes darted keenly from Varvara Petrovna to the cripple and
back again; her lips were drawn into a smile, but not a pleasant
one. Varvara Petrovna saw that smile. Meanwhile Marya Timofyevna was
absolutely transported. With evident enjoyment and without a trace
of embarrassment she stared at Varvara Petrovna's beautiful
drawing-room--the furniture, the carpets, the pictures on the walls, the
old-fashioned painted ceiling, the great bronze crucifix in the corner,
the china lamp, the albums, the objects on the table.

"And you're here, too, Shatushka!" she cried suddenly. "Only fancy, I
saw you a long time ago, but I thought it couldn't be you! How could you
come here!" And she laughed gaily.

"You know this woman?" said Varvara Petrovna, turning to him at once.

"I know her," muttered Shatov. He seemed about to move from his chair,
but remained sitting.

"What do you know of her? Make haste, please!"

"Oh, well..." he stammered with an incongruous smile. "You see for
yourself...."

"What do I see? Come now, say something!"

"She lives in the same house as I do... with her brother... an officer."

"Well?"

Shatov stammered again.

"It's not worth talking about..." he muttered, and relapsed into
determined silence. He positively flushed with determination.

"Of course one can expect nothing else from you," said Varvara Petrovna
indignantly. It was clear to her now that they all knew something and,
at the same time, that they were all scared, that they were evading her
questions, and anxious to keep something from her.

The footman came in and brought her, on a little silver tray, the cup of
coffee she had so specially ordered, but at a sign from her moved with
it at once towards Marya Timofyevna.

"You were very cold just now, my dear; make haste and drink it and get
warm."

_"Merci."_

Marya Timofyevna took the cup and at once went off into a giggle
at having said _merci_ to the footman. But meeting Varvara Petrovna's
reproving eyes, she was overcome with shyness and put the cup on the
table.

"Auntie, surely you're not angry?" she faltered with a sort of flippant
playfulness.

"Wh-a-a-t?" Varvara Petrovna started, and drew herself up in her chair.
"I'm not your aunt. What are you thinking of?"

Marya Timofyevna, not expecting such an angry outburst, began trembling
all over in little convulsive shudders, as though she were in a fit, and
sank back in her chair.

"I... I... thought that was the proper way," she faltered, gazing
open-eyed at Varvara Petrovna. "Liza called you that."

"What Liza?"

"Why, this young lady here," said Marya Timofyevna, pointing with her
finger.

"So she's Liza already?"

"You called her that yourself just now," said Marya Timofyevna growing
a little bolder. "And I dreamed of a beauty like that," she added,
laughing, as it were accidentally.

Varvara Petrovna reflected, and grew calmer, she even smiled faintly at
Marya Timofyevna's last words; the latter, catching her smile, got up
from her chair, and limping, went timidly towards her.

"Take it. I forgot to give it back. Don't be angry with my rudeness."

She took from her shoulders the black shawl that Varvara Petrovna had
wrapped round her.

"Put it on again at once, and you can keep it always. Go and sit down,
drink your coffee, and please don't be afraid of me, my dear, don't
worry yourself. I am beginning to understand you."

_"Chère amie..."_ Stepan Trofimovitch ventured again.

"Ach, Stepan Trofimovitch, it's bewildering enough without you. You
might at least spare me.... Please ring that bell there, near you, to
the maid's room."

A silence followed. Her eyes strayed irritably and suspiciously over all
our faces. Agasha, her favourite maid, came in.

"Bring me my check shawl, the one I bought in Geneva. What's Darya
Pavlovna doing?"

"She's not very well, madam."

"Go and ask her to come here. Say that I want her particularly, even if
she's not well."

At that instant there was again, as before, an unusual noise of steps
and voices in the next room, and suddenly Praskovya Ivanovna, panting
and "distracted," appeared in the doorway. She was leaning on the arm of
Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

"Ach, heavens, I could scarcely drag myself here. Liza, you mad girl,
how you treat your mother!" she squeaked, concentrating in that squeak,
as weak and irritable people are wont to do, all her accumulated
irritability. "Varvara Petrovna, I've come for my daughter!"

Varvara Petrovna looked at her from under her brows, half rose to meet
her, and scarcely concealing her vexation brought out: "Good morning,
Praskovya Ivanovna, please be seated, I knew you would come!"


II

There could be nothing surprising to Praskovya Ivanovna in such a
reception. Varvara Petrovna had from childhood upwards treated her
old school friend tyrannically, and under a show of friendship almost
contemptuously. And this was an exceptional occasion too. During the
last few days there had almost been a complete rupture between the two
households, as I have mentioned incidentally already. The reason of this
rupture was still a mystery to Varvara Petrovna, which made it all
the more offensive; but the chief cause of offence was that Praskovya
Ivanovna had succeeded in taking up an extraordinarily supercilious
attitude towards Varvara Petrovna. Varvara Petrovna was wounded of
course, and meanwhile some strange rumours had reached her which also
irritated her extremely, especially by their vagueness. Varvara Petrovna
was of a direct and proudly frank character, somewhat slap-dash in her
methods, indeed, if the expression is permissible. There was nothing
she detested so much as secret and mysterious insinuations, she always
preferred war in the open. Anyway, the two ladies had not met for five
days. The last visit had been paid by Varvara Petrovna, who had come
back from "that Drozdov woman" offended and perplexed. I can say with
certainty that Praskovya Ivanovna had come on this occasion with the
naïve conviction that Varvara Petrovna would, for some reason, be sure
to stand in awe of her. This was evident from the very expression of her
face. Evidently too, Varvara Petrovna was always possessed by a demon of
haughty pride whenever she had the least ground for suspecting that she
was for some reason supposed to be humiliated. Like many weak people,
who for a long time allow themselves to be insulted without resenting
it, Praskovya Ivanovna showed an extraordinary violence in her attack at
the first favourable opportunity. It is true that she was not well, and
always became more irritable in illness. I must add finally, that our
presence in the drawing-room could hardly be much check to the two
ladies who had been friends from childhood, if a quarrel had broken out
between them. We were looked upon as friends of the family, and almost
as their subjects. I made that reflection with some alarm at the time.
Stepan Trofimovitch, who had not sat down since the entrance of Varvara
Petrovna, sank helplessly into an arm-chair on hearing Praskovya
Ivanovna's squeal, and tried to catch my eye with a look of despair.
Shatov turned sharply in his chair, and growled something to himself.
I believe he meant to get up and go away. Liza rose from her chair but
sank back again at once without even paying befitting attention to her
mother's squeal--not from "waywardness," but obviously because she
was entirely absorbed by some other overwhelming impression. She was
looking absent-mindedly into the air, no longer noticing even Marya
Timofyevna.


III

"Ach, here!" Praskovya Ivanovna indicated an easy chair near the table
and sank heavily into it with the assistance of Mavriky Nikolaevitch.
"I wouldn't have sat down in your house, my lady, if it weren't for my
legs," she added in a breaking voice.

Varvara Petrovna raised her head a little, and with an expression of
suffering pressed the fingers of her right hand to her right temple,
evidently in acute pain _(tic douloureux)_.

"Why so, Praskovya Ivanovna; why wouldn't you sit down in my house? I
possessed your late husband's sincere friendship all his life; and you
and I used to play with our dolls at school together as girls."

Praskovya Ivanovna waved her hands.

"I knew that was coming! You always begin about the school when you want
to reproach me--that's your way. But to my thinking that's only fine
talk. I can't stand the school you're always talking about."

"You've come in rather a bad temper, I'm afraid; how are your legs? Here
they're bringing you some coffee, please have some, drink it and don't
be cross."

"Varvara Petrovna, you treat me as though I were a child. I won't have
any coffee, so there!"

And she pettishly waved away the footman who was bringing her coffee.
(All the others refused coffee too except Mavriky Nikolaevitch and me.
Stepan Trofimovitch took it, but put it aside on the table. Though Marya
Timofyevna was very eager to have another cup and even put out her hand
to take it, on second thoughts she refused it ceremoniously, and was
obviously pleased with herself for doing so.)

Varvara Petrovna gave a wry smile.

"I'll tell you what it is, Praskovya Ivanovna, my friend, you must
have taken some fancy into your head again, and that's why you've come.
You've simply lived on fancies all your life. You flew into a fury at
the mere mention of our school; but do you remember how you came and
persuaded all the class that a hussar called Shablykin had proposed to
you, and how Mme. Lefebure proved on the spot you were lying. Yet you
weren't lying, you were simply imagining it all to amuse yourself. Come,
tell me, what is it now? What are you fancying now; what is it vexes
you?"

"And you fell in love with the priest who used to teach us scripture at
school--so much for you, since you've such a spiteful memory. Ha ha ha!"

She laughed viciously and went off into a fit of coughing.

"Ah, you've not forgotten the priest then..." said Varvara Petrovna,
looking at her vindictively.

Her face turned green. Praskovya Ivanovna suddenly assumed a dignified
air.

"I'm in no laughing mood now, madam. Why have you drawn my daughter
into your scandals in the face of the whole town? That's what I've come
about."

"My scandals?" Varvara Petrovna drew herself up menacingly.

"Maman, I entreat you too, to restrain yourself," Lizaveta Nikolaevna
brought out suddenly.

"What's that you say?" The maman was on the point of breaking into a
squeal again, but catching her daughter's flashing eye, she subsided
suddenly.

"How could you talk about scandal, maman?" cried Liza, flushing red.
"I came of my own accord with Yulia Mihailovna's permission, because I
wanted to learn this unhappy woman's story and to be of use to her."

"This unhappy woman's story!" Praskovya Ivanovna drawled with a spiteful
laugh. "Is it your place to mix yourself up with such 'stories.' Ach,
enough of your tyrannising!" She turned furiously to Varvara Petrovna.
"I don't know whether it's true or not, they say you keep the whole town
in order, but it seems your turn has come at last."

Varvara Petrovna sat straight as an arrow ready to fly from the bow. For
ten seconds she looked sternly and immovably at Praskovya Ivanovna.

"Well, Praskovya, you must thank God that all here present are our
friends," she said at last with ominous composure. "You've said a great
deal better unsaid."

"But I'm not so much afraid of what the world will say, my lady, as
some people. It's you who, under a show of pride, are trembling at what
people will say. And as for all here being your friends, it's better for
you than if strangers had been listening."

"Have you grown wiser during this last week?"

"It's not that I've grown wiser, but simply that the truth has come out
this week."

"What truth has come out this week? Listen, Praskovya Ivanovna, don't
irritate me. Explain to me this minute, I beg you as a favour, what
truth has come out and what do you mean by that?"

"Why there it is, sitting before you!" and Praskovya Ivanovna suddenly
pointed at Marya Timofyevna with that desperate determination which
takes no heed of consequences, if only it can make an impression at
the moment. Marya Timofyevna, who had watched her all the time with
light-hearted curiosity, laughed exultingly at the sight of the wrathful
guest's finger pointed impetuously at her, and wriggled gleefully in her
easy chair.

"God Almighty have mercy on us, they've all gone crazy!" exclaimed
Varvara Petrovna, and turning pale she sank back in her chair.

She turned so pale that it caused some commotion. Stepan Trofimovitch
was the first to rush up to her. I drew near also; even Liza got up from
her seat, though she did not come forward. But the most alarmed of all
was Praskovya Ivanovna herself. She uttered a scream, got up as far as
she could and almost wailed in a lachrymose voice:

"Varvara Petrovna, dear, forgive me for my wicked foolishness! Give her
some water, somebody."

"Don't whimper, please, Praskovya Ivanovna, and leave me alone,
gentlemen, please, I don't want any water!" Varvara Petrovna pronounced
in a firm though low voice, with blanched lips.

"Varvara Petrovna, my dear," Praskovya Ivanovna went on, a little
reassured, "though I am to blame for my reckless words, what's upset me
more than anything are these anonymous letters that some low creatures
keep bombarding me with; they might write to you, since it concerns you,
but I've a daughter!"

Varvara Petrovna looked at her in silence, with wide-open eyes,
listening with wonder. At that moment a side-door in the corner opened
noiselessly, and Darya Pavlovna made her appearance. She stood still and
looked round. She was struck by our perturbation. Probably she did not
at first distinguish Marya Timofyevna, of whose presence she had not
been informed. Stepan Trofimovitch was the first to notice her; he made
a rapid movement, turned red, and for some reason proclaimed in a loud
voice: "Darya Pavlovna!" so that all eyes turned on the new-comer.

"Oh, is this your Darya Pavlovna!" cried Marya Timofyevna. "Well,
Shatushka, your sister's not like you. How can my fellow call such a
charmer the serf-wench Dasha?"

Meanwhile Darya Pavlovna had gone up to Varvara Petrovna, but struck
by Marya Timofyevna's exclamation she turned quickly and stopped just
before her chair, looking at the imbecile with a long fixed gaze.

"Sit down, Dasha," Varvara Petrovna brought out with terrifying
composure. "Nearer, that's right. You can see this woman, sitting down.
Do you know her?"

"I have never seen her," Dasha answered quietly, and after a pause she
added at once:

"She must be the invalid sister of Captain Lebyadkin."

"And it's the first time I've set eyes on you, my love, though I've been
interested and wanted to know you a long time, for I see how
well-bred you are in every movement you make," Marya Timofyevna cried
enthusiastically. "And though my footman swears at you, can such a
well-educated charming person as you really have stolen money from
him? For you are sweet, sweet, sweet, I tell you that from myself!" she
concluded, enthusiastically waving her hand.

"Can you make anything of it?" Varvara Petrovna asked with proud
dignity.

"I understand it...."

"Have you heard about the money?"

"No doubt it's the money that I undertook at Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's
request to hand over to her brother, Captain Lebyadkin."

A silence followed.

"Did Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch himself ask you to do so?"

"He was very anxious to send that money, three hundred roubles, to Mr.
Lebyadkin. And as he didn't know his address, but only knew that he
was to be in our town, he charged me to give it to Mr. Lebyadkin if he
came."

"What is the money... lost? What was this woman speaking about just
now?"

"That I don't know. I've heard before that Mr. Lebyadkin says I didn't
give him all the money, but I don't understand his words. There were
three hundred roubles and I sent him three hundred roubles."

Darya Pavlovna had almost completely regained her composure. And it was
difficult, I may mention, as a rule, to astonish the girl or ruffle her
calm for long--whatever she might be feeling. She brought out all her
answers now without haste, replied immediately to every question with
accuracy, quietly, smoothly, and without a trace of the sudden emotion
she had shown at first, or the slightest embarrassment which might
have suggested a consciousness of guilt. Varvara Petrovna's eyes were
fastened upon her all the time she was speaking. Varvara Petrovna
thought for a minute, "If," she pronounced at last firmly, evidently
addressing all present, though she only looked at Dasha, "if Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch did not appeal even to me but asked you to do this for
him, he must have had his reasons for doing so. I don't consider I have
any right to inquire into them, if they are kept secret from me. But the
very fact of your having taken part in the matter reassures me on that
score, be sure of that, Darya, in any case. But you see, my dear, you
may, through ignorance of the world, have quite innocently done
something imprudent; and you did so when you undertook to have dealings
with a low character. The rumours spread by this rascal show what a
mistake you made. But I will find out about him, and as it is my task to
protect you, I shall know how to defend you. But now all this must be
put a stop to."

"The best thing to do," said Marya Timofyevna, popping up from her
chair, "is to send him to the footmen's room when he comes. Let him
sit on the benches there and play cards with them while we sit here and
drink coffee. We might send him a cup of coffee too, but I have a great
contempt for him."

And she wagged her head expressively.

"We must put a stop to this," Varvara Petrovna repeated, listening
attentively to Marya Timofyevna. "Ring, Stepan Trofimovitch, I beg you."

Stepan Trofimovitch rang, and suddenly stepped forward, all excitement.

"If... if..." he faltered feverishly, flushing, breaking off and
stuttering, "if I too have heard the most revolting story, or rather
slander, it was with utter indignation..._enfin c'est un homme perdu, et
quelque chose comme un forçat evadé...._"

He broke down and could not go on. Varvara Petrovna, screwing up her
eyes, looked him up and down.

The ceremonious butler Alexey Yegorytch came in.

"The carriage," Varvara Petrovna ordered. "And you, Alexey Yegorytch,
get ready to escort Miss Lebyadkin home; she will give you the address
herself."

"Mr. Lebyadkin has been waiting for her for some time downstairs, and
has been begging me to announce him."

"That's impossible, Varvara Petrovna!" and Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had
sat all the time in unbroken silence, suddenly came forward in alarm.
"If I may speak, he is not a man who can be admitted into society.
He... he... he's an impossible person, Varvara Petrovna!"

"Wait a moment," said Varvara Petrovna to Alexey Yegorytch, and he
disappeared at once.

_"C'est un homme malhonnête et je crois même que c'est un forçat evadé
ou quelque chose dans ce genre,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch muttered again, and
again he flushed red and broke off.

"Liza, it's time we were going," announced Praskovya Ivanovna
disdainfully, getting up from her seat. She seemed sorry that in her
alarm she had called herself a fool. While Darya Pavlovna was speaking,
she listened, pressing her lips superciliously. But what struck me most
was the expression of Lizaveta Nikolaevna from the moment Darya Pavlovna
had come in. There was a gleam of hatred and hardly disguised contempt
in her eyes.

"Wait one minute, Praskovya Ivanovna, I beg you." Varvara Petrovna
detained her, still with the same exaggerated composure. "Kindly sit
down. I intend to speak out, and your legs are bad. That's right, thank
you. I lost my temper just now and uttered some impatient words. Be so
good as to forgive me. I behaved foolishly and I'm the first to regret
it, because I like fairness in everything. Losing your temper too,
of course, you spoke of certain anonymous letters. Every anonymous
communication is deserving of contempt, just because it's not signed. If
you think differently I'm sorry for you. In any case, if I were in your
place, I would not pry into such dirty corners, I would not soil my
hands with it. But you have soiled yours. However, since you have
begun on the subject yourself, I must tell you that six days ago I too
received a clownish anonymous letter. In it some rascal informs me that
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has gone out of his mind, and that I have reason
to fear some lame woman, who 'is destined to play a great part in
my life.' I remember the expression. Reflecting and being aware that
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has very numerous enemies, I promptly sent for a
man living here, one of his secret enemies, and the most vindictive and
contemptible of them, and from my conversation with him I gathered what
was the despicable source of the anonymous letter. If you too, my poor
Praskovya Ivanovna, have been worried by similar letters on my account,
and as you say 'bombarded' with them, I am, of course, the first to
regret having been the innocent cause of it. That's all I wanted to tell
you by way of explanation. I'm very sorry to see that you are so
tired and so upset. Besides, I have quite made up my mind to see that
suspicious personage of whom Mavriky Nikolaevitch said just now, a
little inappropriately, that it was impossible to receive him. Liza in
particular need have nothing to do with it. Come to me, Liza, my dear,
let me kiss you again."

Liza crossed the room and stood in silence before Varvara Petrovna. The
latter kissed her, took her hands, and, holding her at arm's-length,
looked at her with feeling, then made the sign of the cross over her and
kissed her again.

"Well, good-bye, Liza" (there was almost the sound of tears in Varvara
Petrovna's voice), "believe that I shall never cease to love you
whatever fate has in store for you. God be with you. I have always
blessed His Holy Will...."

She would have added something more, but restrained herself and broke
off. Liza was walking back to her place, still in the same silence, as
it were plunged in thought, but she suddenly stopped before her mother.

"I am not going yet, mother. I'll stay a little longer at auntie's," she
brought out in a low voice, but there was a note of iron determination
in those quiet words.

"My goodness! What now?" wailed Praskovya Ivanovna, clasping her hands
helplessly. But Liza did not answer, and seemed indeed not to hear her;
she sat down in the same corner and fell to gazing into space again as
before.

There was a look of pride and triumph in Varvara Petrovna's face.

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch, I have a great favour to ask of you. Be so kind
as to go and take a look at that person downstairs, and if there is any
possibility of admitting him, bring him up here."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch bowed and went out. A moment later he brought in
Mr. Lebyadkin.


IV

I have said something of this gentleman's outward appearance. He was a
tall, curly-haired, thick-set fellow about forty with a purplish, rather
bloated and flabby face, with cheeks that quivered at every movement of
his head, with little bloodshot eyes that were sometimes rather crafty,
with moustaches and side-whiskers, and with an incipient double chin,
fleshy and rather unpleasant-looking. But what was most striking about
him was the fact that he appeared now wearing a dress-coat and clean
linen.

"There are people on whom clean linen is almost unseemly," as Liputin
had once said when Stepan Trofimovitch reproached him in jest for being
untidy. The captain had perfectly new black gloves too, of which he
held the right one in his hand, while the left, tightly stretched and
unbuttoned, covered part of the huge fleshy fist in which he held a
brand-new, glossy round hat, probably worn for the first time that day.
It appeared therefore that "the garb of love," of which he had shouted
to Shatov the day before, really did exist. All this, that is, the
dress-coat and clean linen, had been procured by Liputin's advice with
some mysterious object in view (as I found out later). There was no
doubt that his coming now (in a hired carriage) was at the instigation
and with the assistance of some one else; it would never have dawned on
him, nor could he by himself have succeeded in dressing, getting ready
and making up his mind in three-quarters of an hour, even if the scene
in the porch of the cathedral had reached his ears at once. He was not
drunk, but was in the dull, heavy, dazed condition of a man suddenly
awakened after many days of drinking. It seemed as though he would be
drunk again if one were to put one's hands on his shoulders and rock
him to and fro once or twice. He was hurrying into the drawing-room but
stumbled over a rug near the doorway. Marya Timofyevna was helpless with
laughter. He looked savagely at her and suddenly took a few rapid steps
towards Varvara Petrovna.

"I have come, madam..." he blared out like a trumpet-blast.

"Be so good, sir, as to take a seat there, on that chair," said Varvara
Petrovna, drawing herself up. "I shall hear you as well from there, and
it will be more convenient for me to look at you from here."

The captain stopped short, looking blankly before him. He turned,
however, and sat down on the seat indicated close to the door. An
extreme lack of self-confidence and at the same time insolence, and a
sort of incessant irritability, were apparent in the expression of his
face. He was horribly scared, that was evident, but his self-conceit
was wounded, and it might be surmised that his mortified vanity might on
occasion lead him to any effrontery, in spite of his cowardice. He was
evidently uneasy at every movement of his clumsy person. We all know
that when such gentlemen are brought by some marvellous chance into
society, they find their worst ordeal in their own hands, and the
impossibility of disposing them becomingly, of which they are conscious
at every moment. The captain sat rigid in his chair, with his hat and
gloves in his hands and his eyes fixed with a senseless stare on the
stern face of Varvara Petrovna. He would have liked, perhaps, to have
looked about more freely, but he could not bring himself to do so yet.
Marya Timofyevna, apparently thinking his appearance very funny, laughed
again, but he did not stir. Varvara Petrovna ruthlessly kept him in this
position for a long time, a whole minute, staring at him without mercy.

"In the first place allow me to learn your name from yourself," Varvara
Petrovna pronounced in measured and impressive tones.

"Captain Lebyadkin," thundered the captain. "I have come, madam..." He
made a movement again.

"Allow me!" Varvara Petrovna checked him again. "Is this unfortunate
person who interests me so much really your sister?"

"My sister, madam, who has escaped from control, for she is in a certain
condition...."

He suddenly faltered and turned crimson. "Don't misunderstand me,
madam," he said, terribly confused. "Her own brother's not going to
throw mud at her... in a certain condition doesn't mean in such a
condition... in the sense of an injured reputation... in the last
stage..." he suddenly broke off.

"Sir!" said Varvara Petrovna, raising her head.

"In this condition!" he concluded suddenly, tapping the middle of his
forehead with his finger.

A pause followed.

"And has she suffered in this way for long?" asked Varvara Petrovna,
with a slight drawl.

"Madam, I have come to thank you for the generosity you showed in the
porch, in a Russian, brotherly way."

"Brotherly?"

"I mean, not brotherly, but simply in the sense that I am my sister's
brother; and believe me, madam," he went on more hurriedly, turning
crimson again, "I am not so uneducated as I may appear at first sight in
your drawing-room. My sister and I are nothing, madam, compared with the
luxury we observe here. Having enemies who slander us, besides. But on
the question of reputation Lebyadkin is proud, madam... and... and ...
and I've come to repay with thanks.... Here is money, madam!"

At this point he pulled out a pocket-book, drew out of it a bundle of
notes, and began turning them over with trembling fingers in a perfect
fury of impatience. It was evident that he was in haste to explain
something, and indeed it was quite necessary to do so. But probably
feeling himself that his fluster with the money made him look even more
foolish, he lost the last traces of self-possession. The money refused
to be counted. His fingers fumbled helplessly, and to complete his shame
a green note escaped from the pocket-book, and fluttered in zigzags on
to the carpet.

"Twenty roubles, madam." He leapt up suddenly with the roll of notes in
his hand, his face perspiring with discomfort. Noticing the note which
had dropped on the floor, he was bending down to pick it up, but for
some reason overcome by shame, he dismissed it with a wave.

"For your servants, madam; for the footman who picks it up. Let them
remember my sister!"

"I cannot allow that," Varvara Petrovna brought out hurriedly, even with
some alarm.

"In that case..."

He bent down, picked it up, flushing crimson, and suddenly going up to
Varvara Petrovna held out the notes he had counted.

"What's this?" she cried, really alarmed at last, and positively
shrinking back in her chair.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch, Stepan Trofimovitch, and I all stepped forward.

"Don't be alarmed, don't be alarmed; I'm not mad, by God, I'm not mad,"
the captain kept asseverating excitedly.

"Yes, sir, you're out of your senses."

"Madam, she's not at all as you suppose. I am an insignificant link.
Oh, madam, wealthy are your mansions, but poor is the dwelling of Marya
Anonyma, my sister, whose maiden name was Lebyadkin, but whom we'll call
Anonyma for the time, only for _the time,_ madam, for God Himself will
not suffer it for ever. Madam, you gave her ten roubles and she took it,
because it was from _you,_ madam! Do you hear, madam? From no one else
in the world would this Marya Anonyma take it, or her grandfather, the
officer killed in the Caucasus before the very eyes of Yermolov, would
turn in his grave. But from you, madam, from you she will take anything.
But with one hand she takes it, and with the other she holds out to
you twenty roubles by way of subscription to one of the benevolent
committees in Petersburg and Moscow, of which you are a member... for
you published yourself, madam, in the _Moscow News,_ that you are ready to
receive subscriptions in our town, and that any one may subscribe...."

The captain suddenly broke off; he breathed hard as though after some
difficult achievement. All he said about the benevolent society had
probably been prepared beforehand, perhaps under Liputin's supervision.
He perspired more than ever; drops literally trickled down his temples.
Varvara Petrovna looked searchingly at him.

"The subscription list," she said severely, "is always downstairs in
charge of my porter. There you can enter your subscriptions if you wish
to. And so I beg you to put your notes away and not to wave them in the
air. That's right. I beg you also to go back to your seat. That's right.
I am very sorry, sir, that I made a mistake about your sister, and gave
her something as though she were poor when she is so rich. There's only
one thing I don't understand, why she can only take from me, and no one
else. You so insisted upon that that I should like a full explanation."

"Madam, that is a secret that may be buried only in the grave!" answered
the captain.

"Why?" Varvara Petrovna asked, not quite so firmly.

"Madam, madam..."

He relapsed into gloomy silence, looking on the floor, laying his right
hand on his heart. Varvara Petrovna waited, not taking her eyes off him.

"Madam!" he roared suddenly. "Will you allow me to ask you one question?
Only one, but frankly, directly, like a Russian, from the heart?"

"Kindly do so."

"Have you ever suffered madam, in your life?"

"You simply mean to say that you have been or are being ill-treated by
some one."

"Madam, madam!" He jumped up again, probably unconscious of doing
so, and struck himself on the breast. "Here in this bosom so much has
accumulated, so much that God Himself will be amazed when it is revealed
at the Day of Judgment."

"H'm! A strong expression!"

"Madam, I speak perhaps irritably...."

"Don't be uneasy. I know myself when to stop you."

"May I ask you another question, madam?"

"Ask another question."

"Can one die simply from the generosity of one's feelings?"

"I don't know, as I've never asked myself such a question."

"You don't know! You've never asked yourself such a question," he said
with pathetic irony. "Well, if that's it, if that's it...

_"Be still, despairing heart!"_

And he struck himself furiously on the chest. He was by now walking
about the room again.

It is typical of such people to be utterly incapable of keeping their
desires to themselves; they have, on the contrary, an irresistible
impulse to display them in all their unseemliness as soon as they arise.
When such a gentleman gets into a circle in which he is not at home
he usually begins timidly,--but you have only to give him an inch and he
will at once rush into impertinence. The captain was already excited.
He walked about waving his arms and not listening to questions, talked
about himself very, very quickly, so that sometimes his tongue would not
obey him, and without finishing one phrase he passed to another. It is
true he was probably not quite sober. Moreover, Lizaveta Nikolaevna
was sitting there too, and though he did not once glance at her, her
presence seemed to over-excite him terribly; that, however, is only my
supposition. There must have been some reason which led Varvara Petrovna
to resolve to listen to such a man in spite of her repugnance. Praskovya
Ivanovna was simply shaking with terror, though, I believe she really
did not quite understand what it was about. Stepan Trofimovitch was
trembling too, but that was, on the contrary, because he was disposed to
understand everything, and exaggerate it. Mavriky Nikolaevitch stood in
the attitude of one ready to defend all present; Liza was pale, and she
gazed fixedly with wide-open eyes at the wild captain. Shatov sat in
the same position as before, but, what was strangest of all, Marya
Timofyevna had not only ceased laughing, but had become terribly sad.
She leaned her right elbow on the table, and with a prolonged, mournful
gaze watched her brother declaiming. Darya Pavlovna alone seemed to me
calm.

"All that is nonsensical allegory," said Varvara Petrovna, getting angry
at last. "You haven't answered my question, why? I insist on an answer."

"I haven't answered, why? You insist on an answer, why?" repeated
the captain, winking. "That little word 'why' has run through all the
universe from the first day of creation, and all nature cries every
minute to it's Creator, 'why?' And for seven thousand years it has had
no answer, and must Captain Lebyadkin alone answer? And is that justice,
madam?"

"That's all nonsense and not to the point!" cried Varvara Petrovna,
getting angry and losing patience. "That's allegory; besides, you
express yourself too sensationally, sir, which I consider impertinence."

"Madam," the captain went on, not hearing, "I should have liked perhaps
to be called Ernest, yet I am forced to bear the vulgar name Ignat--why
is that do you suppose? I should have liked to be called Prince de
Monbart, yet I am only Lebyadkin, derived from a swan.* Why is that?
I am a poet, madam, a poet in soul, and might be getting a thousand
roubles at a time from a publisher, yet I am forced to live in a pig
pail. Why? Why, madam? To my mind Russia is a freak of nature and
nothing else."

    * From Lebyed, a Swan.

"Can you really say nothing more definite?"

"I can read you the poem, 'The Cockroach,' madam."

"Wha-a-t?"

"Madam, I'm not mad yet! I shall be mad, no doubt I shall be, but I'm
not so yet. Madam, a friend of mine--a most honourable man--has written
a Krylov's fable, called 'The Cockroach.' May I read it?"

"You want to read some fable of Krylov's?"

"No, it's not a fable of Krylov's I want to read. It's my fable, my own
composition. Believe me, madam, without offence I'm not so uneducated
and depraved as not to understand that Russia can boast of a great
fable-writer, Krylov, to whom the Minister of Education has raised a
monument in the Summer Gardens for the diversion of the young. Here,
madam, you ask me why? The answer is at the end of this fable, in
letters of fire."

"Read your fable."

     "Lived a cockroach in the world
     Such was his condition,
     In a glass he chanced to fall
     Full of fly-perdition."

"Heavens! What does it mean?" cried Varvara Petrovna.

"That's when flies get into a glass in the summer-time," the captain
explained hurriedly with the irritable impatience of an author interrupted
in reading. "Then it is perdition to the flies, any fool can understand.
Don't interrupt, don't interrupt. You'll see, you'll see...." He kept waving
his arms.

     "But he squeezed against the flies,
     They woke up and cursed him,
     Raised to Jove their angry cries;
     'The glass is full to bursting!'
     In the middle of the din
     Came along Nikifor,
     Fine old man, and looking in...

I haven't quite finished it. But no matter, I'll tell it in words,"
the captain rattled on. "Nikifor takes the glass, and in spite of their
outcry empties away the whole stew, flies, and beetles and all, into the
pig pail, which ought to have been done long ago. But observe, madam,
observe, the cockroach doesn't complain. That's the answer to your
question, why?" he cried triumphantly. "'The cockroach does not
complain.' As for Nikifor he typifies nature," he added, speaking
rapidly and walking complacently about the room.

Varvara Petrovna was terribly angry.

"And allow me to ask you about that money said to have been received
from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, and not to have been given to you, about
which you dared to accuse a person belonging to my household."

"It's a slander!" roared Lebyadkin, flinging up his right hand
tragically.

"No, it's not a slander."

"Madam, there are circumstances that force one to endure family disgrace
rather than proclaim the truth aloud. Lebyadkin will not blab, madam!"

He seemed dazed; he was carried away; he felt his importance; he
certainly had some fancy in his mind. By now he wanted to insult some
one, to do something nasty to show his power.

"Ring, please, Stepan Trofimovitch," Varvara Petrovna asked him.

"Lebyadkin's cunning, madam." he said, winking with his evil smile;
"he's cunning, but he too has a weak spot, he too at times is in the
portals of passions, and these portals are the old military hussars'
bottle, celebrated by Denis Davydov. So when he is in those portals,
madam, he may happen to send a letter in verse, a most magnificent
letter--but which afterwards he would have wished to take back, with the
tears of all his life; for the feeling of the beautiful is destroyed.
But the bird has flown, you won't catch it by the tail. In those portals
now, madam, Lebyadkin may have spoken about an honourable young lady,
in the honourable indignation of a soul revolted by wrongs, and his
slanderers have taken advantage of it. But Lebyadkin is cunning, madam!
And in vain a malignant wolf sits over him every minute, filling his
glass and waiting for the end. Lebyadkin won't blab. And at the bottom
of the bottle he always finds instead Lebyadkin's cunning. But enough,
oh, enough, madam! Your splendid halls might belong to the noblest in
the land, but the cockroach will not complain. Observe that, observe
that he does not complain, and recognise his noble spirit!"

At that instant a bell rang downstairs from the porter's room, and
almost at the same moment Alexey Yegorytch appeared in response to
Stepan Trofimovitch's ring, which he had somewhat delayed answering. The
correct old servant was unusually excited.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has graciously arrived this moment and is
coming here," he pronounced, in reply to Varvara Petrovna's questioning
glance. I particularly remember her at that moment; at first she turned
pale, but suddenly her eyes flashed. She drew herself up in her chair
with an air of extraordinary determination. Every one was astounded
indeed. The utterly unexpected arrival of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
who was not expected for another month, was not only strange from its
