to anticipate him.

"Please, Stepan Trofimovitch, for God's sake, don't say anything," she
began, speaking with haste and excitement, with a look of pain in her
face, hurriedly stretching out her hands to him. "Be sure that I still
respect you as much... and think just as highly of you, and... think
well of me too, Stepan Trofimovitch, that will mean a great deal to me,
a great deal...."

Stepan Trofimovitch made her a very, very low bow.

"It's for you to decide, Darya Pavlovna; you know that you are perfectly
free in the whole matter! You have been, and you are now, and you always
will be," Varvara Petrovna concluded impressively.

"Bah! Now I understand it all!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, slapping
himself on the forehead. "But... but what a position I am put in by
all this! Darya Pavlovna, please forgive me!... What do you call your
treatment of me, eh?" he said, addressing his father.

"Pierre, you might speak to me differently, mightn't you, my boy,"
Stepan Trofimovitch observed quite quietly.

"Don't cry out, please," said Pierre, with a wave of his hand. "Believe
me, it's all your sick old nerves, and crying out will do no good at
all. You'd better tell me instead, why didn't you warn me since you
might have supposed I should speak out at the first chance?"

Stepan Trofimovitch looked searchingly at him.

"Pierre, you who know so much of what goes on here, can you really have
known nothing of this business and have heard nothing about it?"

"What? What a set! So it's not enough to be a child in your old age,
you must be a spiteful child too! Varvara Petrovna, did you hear what he
said?"

There was a general outcry; but then suddenly an incident took place
which no one could have anticipated.


VIII

First of all I must mention that, for the last two or three minutes
Lizaveta Nikolaevna had seemed to be possessed by a new impulse; she
was whispering something hurriedly to her mother, and to Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, who bent down to listen. Her face was agitated, but at the
same time it had a look of resolution. At last she got up from her
seat in evident haste to go away, and hurried her mother whom Mavriky
Nikolaevitch began helping up from her low chair. But it seemed they
were not destined to get away without seeing everything to the end.

Shatov, who had been forgotten by every one in his corner (not far from
Lizaveta Nikolaevna), and who did not seem to know himself why he went
on sitting there, got up from his chair, and walked, without haste, with
resolute steps right across the room to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking
him straight in the face. The latter noticed him approaching at some
distance, and faintly smiled, but when Shatov was close to him he left
off smiling.

When Shatov stood still facing him with his eyes fixed on him, and
without uttering a word, every one suddenly noticed it and there was a
general hush; Pyotr Stepanovitch was the last to cease speaking. Liza
and her mother were standing in the middle of the room. So passed five
seconds; the look of haughty astonishment was followed by one of anger
on Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's face; he scowled....

And suddenly Shatov swung his long, heavy arm, and with all his might
struck him a blow in the face. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch staggered
violently.

Shatov struck the blow in a peculiar way, not at all after the
conventional fashion (if one may use such an expression). It was not a
slap with the palm of his hand, but a blow with the whole fist, and it
was a big, heavy, bony fist covered with red hairs and freckles. If the
blow had struck the nose, it would have broken it. But it hit him on the
cheek, and struck the left corner of the lip and the upper teeth, from
which blood streamed at once.

I believe there was a sudden scream, perhaps Varvara Petrovna
screamed--that I don't remember, because there was a dead hush again;
the whole scene did not last more than ten seconds, however.

Yet a very great deal happened in those seconds.

I must remind the reader again that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's was one
of those natures that know nothing of fear. At a duel he could face the
pistol of his opponent with indifference, and could take aim and kill
with brutal coolness. If anyone had slapped him in the face, I should
have expected him not to challenge his assailant to a duel, but to
murder him on the spot. He was just one of those characters, and would
have killed the man, knowing very well what he was doing, and without
losing his self-control. I fancy, indeed, that he never was liable to
those fits of blind rage which deprive a man of all power of reflection.
Even when overcome with intense anger, as he sometimes was, he was
always able to retain complete self-control, and therefore to realise
that he would certainly be sent to penal servitude for murdering a man
not in a duel; nevertheless, he'd have killed any one who insulted him,
and without the faintest hesitation.

I have been studying Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch of late, and through
special circumstances I know a great many facts about him now, at the
time I write. I should compare him, perhaps, with some gentlemen of the
past of whom legendary traditions are still perceived among us. We are
told, for instance, about the Decabrist L--n, that he was always seeking
for danger, that he revelled in the sensation, and that it had become
a craving of his nature; that in his youth he had rushed into duels for
nothing; that in Siberia he used to go to kill bears with nothing but
a knife; that in the Siberian forests he liked to meet with runaway
convicts, who are, I may observe in passing, more formidable than bears.
There is no doubt that these legendary gentlemen were capable of a
feeling of fear, and even to an extreme degree, perhaps, or they would
have been a great deal quieter, and a sense of danger would never have
become a physical craving with them. But the conquest of fear was
what fascinated them. The continual ecstasy of vanquishing and the
consciousness that no one could vanquish them was what attracted them.
The same L---n struggled with hunger for some time before he was sent
into exile, and toiled to earn his daily bread simply because he did not
care to comply with the requests of his rich father, which he considered
unjust. So his conception of struggle was many-sided, and he did not
prize stoicism and strength of character only in duels and bear-fights.

But many years have passed since those times, and the nervous,
exhausted, complex character of the men of to-day is incompatible with
the craving for those direct and unmixed sensations which were so sought
after by some restlessly active gentlemen of the good old days. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch would, perhaps, have looked down on L--n, and have
called him a boastful cock-a-hoop coward; it's true he wouldn't have
expressed himself aloud. Stavrogin would have shot his opponent in a
duel, and would have faced a bear if necessary, and would have defended
himself from a brigand in the forest as successfully and as fearlessly
as L--n, but it would be without the slightest thrill of enjoyment,
languidly, listlessly, even with ennui and entirely from unpleasant
necessity. In anger, of course, there has been a progress compared with
L--n, even compared with Lermontov. There was perhaps more malignant
anger in Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch than in both put together, but it was a
calm, cold, if one may so say, _reasonable_ anger, and therefore the most
revolting and most terrible possible. I repeat again, I considered him
then, and I still consider him (now that everything is over), a man who,
if he received a slap in the face, or any equivalent insult, would be
certain to kill his assailant at once, on the spot, without challenging
him.

Yet, in the present case, what happened was something different and
amazing.

He had scarcely regained his balance after being almost knocked over in
this humiliating way, and the horrible, as it were, sodden, thud of
the blow in the face had scarcely died away in the room when he seized
Shatov by the shoulders with both hands, but at once, almost at the same
instant, pulled both hands away and clasped them behind his back. He did
not speak, but looked at Shatov, and turned as white as his shirt. But,
strange to say, the light in his eyes seemed to die out. Ten seconds
later his eyes looked cold, and I'm sure I'm not lying--calm. Only he
was terribly pale. Of course I don't know what was passing within the
man, I saw only his exterior. It seems to me that if a man should snatch
up a bar of red-hot iron and hold it tight in his hand to test his
fortitude, and after struggling for ten seconds with insufferable pain
end by overcoming it, such a man would, I fancy, go through something
like what Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was enduring during those ten seconds.

Shatov was the first to drop his eyes, and evidently because he was
unable to go on facing him; then he turned slowly and walked out of the
room, but with a very different step. He withdrew quietly, with peculiar
awkwardness, with his shoulders hunched, his head hanging as though
he were inwardly pondering something. I believe he was whispering
something. He made his way to the door carefully, without stumbling
against anything or knocking anything over; he opened the door a very
little way, and squeezed through almost sideways. As he went out his
shock of hair standing on end at the back of his head was particularly
noticeable.

Then first of all one fearful scream was heard. I saw Lizaveta
Nikolaevna seize her mother by the shoulder and Mavriky Nikolaevitch by
the arm and make two or three violent efforts to draw them out of the
room. But she suddenly uttered a shriek, and fell full length on the
floor, fainting. I can hear the thud of her head on the carpet to this
day.





PART II




CHAPTER I. NIGHT

EIGHT DAYS HAD PASSED. Now that it is all over and I am writing a record
of it, we know all about it; but at the time we knew nothing, and it was
natural that many things should seem strange to us: Stepan Trofimovitch
and I, anyway, shut ourselves up for the first part of the time, and
looked on with dismay from a distance. I did, indeed, go about here and
there, and, as before, brought him various items of news, without which
he could not exist.

I need hardly say that there were rumours of the most varied kind
going about the town in regard to the blow that Stavrogin had received,
Lizaveta Nikolaevna's fainting fit, and all that happened on that
Sunday. But what we wondered was, through whom the story had got about
so quickly and so accurately. Not one of the persons present had any
need to give away the secret of what had happened, or interest to serve
by doing so.

The servants had not been present. Lebyadkin was the only one who might
have chattered, not so much from spite, for he had gone out in great
alarm (and fear of an enemy destroys spite against him), but simply from
incontinence of speech. But Lebyadkin and his sister had disappeared next
day, and nothing could be heard of them. There was no trace of them at
Filipov's house, they had moved, no one knew where, and seemed to have
vanished. Shatov, of whom I wanted to inquire about Marya Timofyevna,
would not open his door, and I believe sat locked up in his room for the
whole of those eight days, even discontinuing his work in the town. He
would not see me. I went to see him on Tuesday and knocked at his door.
I got no answer, but being convinced by unmistakable evidence that he
was at home, I knocked a second time. Then, jumping up, apparently from
his bed, he strode to the door and shouted at the top of his voice:

"Shatov is not at home!"

With that I went away.

Stepan Trofimovitch and I, not without dismay at the boldness of the
supposition, though we tried to encourage one another, reached at last
a conclusion: we made up our mind that the only person who could be
responsible for spreading these rumours was Pyotr Stepanovitch, though
he himself not long after assured his father that he had found the story
on every one's lips, especially at the club, and that the governor
and his wife were familiar with every detail of it. What is even more
remarkable is that the next day, Monday evening, I met Liputin, and
he knew every word that had been passed, so that he must have heard it
first-hand. Many of the ladies (and some of the leading ones) were
very inquisitive about the "mysterious cripple," as they called Marya
Timofyevna. There were some, indeed, who were anxious to see her and
make her acquaintance, so the intervention of the persons who had
been in such haste to conceal the Lebyadkins was timely. But Lizaveta
Nikolaevna's fainting certainly took the foremost place in the story,
and "all society" was interested, if only because it directly concerned
Yulia Mihailovna, as the kinswoman and patroness of the young lady.
And what was there they didn't say! What increased the gossip was the
mysterious position of affairs; both houses were obstinately closed;
Lizaveta Nikolaevna, so they said, was in bed with brain fever. The
same thing was asserted of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with the revolting
addition of a tooth knocked out and a swollen face. It was even
whispered in corners that there would soon be murder among us, that
Stavrogin was not the man to put up with such an insult, and that he
would kill Shatov, but with the secrecy of a Corsican vendetta. People
liked this idea, but the majority of our young people listened with
contempt, and with an air of the most nonchalant indifference, which
was, of course, assumed. The old hostility to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
in the town was in general strikingly manifest. Even sober-minded people
were eager to throw blame on him though they could not have said
for what. It was whispered that he had ruined Lizaveta Nikolaevna's
reputation, and that there had been an intrigue between them in
Switzerland. Cautious people, of course, restrained themselves, but
all listened with relish. There were other things said, though not
in public, but in private, on rare occasions and almost in secret,
extremely strange things, to which I only refer to warn my readers of
them with a view to the later events of my story. Some people, with
knitted brows, said, God knows on what foundation, that Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch had some special business in our province, that he
had, through Count K., been brought into touch with exalted circles in
Petersburg, that he was even, perhaps, in government service, and might
almost be said to have been furnished with some sort of commission from
some one. When very sober-minded and sensible people smiled at this
rumour, observing very reasonably that a man always mixed up with
scandals, and who was beginning his career among us with a swollen face
did not look like a government official, they were told in a whisper
that he was employed not in the official, but, so to say, the
confidential service, and that in such cases it was essential to be as
little like an official as possible. This remark produced a sensation;
we knew that the Zemstvo of our province was the object of marked
attention in the capital. I repeat, these were only flitting rumours
that disappeared for a time when Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch first came
among us. But I may observe that many of the rumours were partly due to
a few brief but malicious words, vaguely and disconnectedly dropped at
the club by a gentleman who had lately returned from Petersburg. This
was a retired captain in the guards, Artemy Pavlovitch Gaganov. He was
a very large landowner in our province and district, a man used to the
society of Petersburg, and a son of the late Pavel Pavlovitch Gaganov,
the venerable old man with whom Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had, over four
years before, had the extraordinarily coarse and sudden encounter which
I have described already in the beginning of my story.

It immediately became known to every one that Yulia Mihailovna had
made a special call on Varvara Petrovna, and had been informed at the
entrance: "Her honour was too unwell to see visitors." It was known,
too, that Yulia Mihailovna sent a message two days later to inquire
after Varvara Petrovna's health. At last she began "defending" Varvara
Petrovna everywhere, of course only in the loftiest sense, that is, in
the vaguest possible way. She listened coldly and sternly to the hurried
remarks made at first about the scene on Sunday, so that during the
later days they were not renewed in her presence. So that the belief
gained ground everywhere that Yulia Mihailovna knew not only the whole
of the mysterious story but all its secret significance to the smallest
detail, and not as an outsider, but as one taking part in it. I may
observe, by the way, that she was already gradually beginning to gain
that exalted influence among us for which she was so eager and which
she was certainly struggling to win, and was already beginning to see
herself "surrounded by a circle." A section of society recognised her
practical sense and tact... but of that later. Her patronage partly
explained Pyotr Stepanovitch's rapid success in our society--a success
with which Stepan Trofimovitch was particularly impressed at the time.

We possibly exaggerated it. To begin with, Pyotr Stepanovitch seemed to
make acquaintance almost instantly with the whole town within the first
four days of his arrival. He only arrived on Sunday; and on Tuesday
I saw him in a carriage with Artemy Pavlovitch Gaganov, a man who was
proud, irritable, and supercilious, in spite of his good breeding,
and who was not easy to get on with. At the governor's, too, Pyotr
Stepanovitch met with a warm welcome, so much so that he was at once
on an intimate footing, like a young friend, treated, so to say,
affectionately. He dined with Yulia Mihailovna almost every day. He had
made her acquaintance in Switzerland, but there was certainly something
curious about the rapidity of his success in the governor's house. In
any case he was reputed, whether truly or not, to have been at one
time a revolutionist abroad, he had had something to do with some
publications and some congresses abroad, "which one can prove from the
newspapers," to quote the malicious remark of Alyosha Telyatnikov, who
had also been once a young friend affectionately treated in the house of
the late governor, but was now, alas, a clerk on the retired list. But
the fact was unmistakable: the former revolutionist, far from being
hindered from returning to his beloved Fatherland, seemed almost to have
been encouraged to do so, so perhaps there was nothing in it. Liputin
whispered to me once that there were rumours that Pyotr Stepanovitch had
once professed himself penitent, and on his return had been pardoned on
mentioning certain names and so, perhaps, had succeeded in expiating his
offence, by promising to be of use to the government in the future. I
repeated these malignant phrases to Stepan Trofimovitch, and although
the latter was in such a state that he was hardly capable of reflection,
he pondered profoundly. It turned out later that Pyotr Stepanovitch had
come to us with a very influential letter of recommendation, that
he had, at any rate, brought one to the governor's wife from a very
important old lady in Petersburg, whose husband was one of the most
distinguished old dignitaries in the capital. This old lady, who was
Yulia Mihailovna's godmother, mentioned in her letter that Count K. knew
Pyotr Stepanovitch very well through Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, made much
of him, and thought him "a very excellent young man in spite of his
former errors." Yulia Mihailovna set the greatest value on her
relations with the "higher spheres," which were few and maintained with
difficulty, and was, no doubt, pleased to get the old lady's letter, but
still there was something peculiar about it. She even forced her husband
upon a familiar footing with Pyotr Stepanovitch, so much so that Mr. von
Lembke complained of it... but of that, too, later. I may mention,
too, that the great author was also favourably disposed to Pyotr
Stepanovitch, and at once invited him to go and see him. Such alacrity
on the part of a man so puffed up with conceit stung Stepan Trofimovitch
more painfully than anything; but I put a different interpretation on
it. In inviting a nihilist to see him, Mr. Karmazinov, no doubt, had in
view his relations with the progressives of the younger generation
in both capitals. The great author trembled nervously before the
revolutionary youth of Russia, and imagining, in his ignorance, that the
future lay in their hands, fawned upon them in a despicable way, chiefly
because they paid no attention to him whatever.


II

Pyotr Stepanovitch ran round to see his father twice, but unfortunately
I was absent on both occasions. He visited him for the first time
only on Wednesday, that is, not till the fourth day after their first
meeting, and then only on business. Their difficulties over the property
were settled, by the way, without fuss or publicity. Varvara Petrovna
took it all on herself, and paid all that was owing, taking over the
land, of course, and only informed Stepan Trofimovitch that it was all
settled and her butler, Alexey Yegorytch, was, by her authorisation,
bringing him something to sign. This Stepan Trofimovitch did, in
silence, with extreme dignity. Apropos of his dignity, I may mention
that I hardly recognised my old friend during those days. He behaved
as he had never done before; became amazingly taciturn and had not even
written one letter to Varvara Petrovna since Sunday, which seemed to me
almost a miracle. What's more, he had become quite calm. He had fastened
upon a final and decisive idea which gave him tranquillity. That was
evident. He had hit upon this idea, and sat still, expecting something.
At first, however, he was ill, especially on Monday. He had an attack
of his summer cholera. He could not remain all that time without news
either; but as soon as I departed from the statement of facts, and began
discussing the case in itself, and formulated any theory, he at once
gesticulated to me to stop. But both his interviews with his son had a
distressing effect on him, though they did not shake his determination.
After each interview he spent the whole day lying on the sofa with a
handkerchief soaked in vinegar on his head. But he continued to remain
calm in the deepest sense.

Sometimes, however, he did not hinder my speaking. Sometimes, too, it
seemed to me that the mysterious determination he had taken seemed to
be failing him and he appeared to be struggling with a new, seductive
stream of ideas. That was only at moments, but I made a note of it. I
suspected that he was longing to assert himself again, to come forth
from his seclusion, to show fight, to struggle to the last.

"_Cher,_ I could crush them!" broke from him on Thursday evening after his
second interview with Pyotr Stepanovitch, when he lay stretched on the
sofa with his head wrapped in a towel.

Till that moment he had not uttered one word all day.

_"Fils, fils, cher,"_ and so on, "I agree all those expressions are
nonsense, kitchen talk, and so be it. I see it for myself. I never gave
him food or drink, I sent him a tiny baby from Berlin to X province by
post, and all that, I admit it.... 'You gave me neither food nor drink,
and sent me by post,' he says, 'and what's more you've robbed me here.'"


"'But you unhappy boy,' I cried to him, 'my heart has been aching for
you all my life; though I did send you by post.' _Il rit._"

"But I admit it. I admit it, granted it was by post," he concluded,
almost in delirium.

_"Passons,"_ he began again, five minutes later. "I don't understand
Turgenev. That Bazarov of his is a fictitious figure, it does not exist
anywhere. The fellows themselves were the first to disown him as unlike
anyone. That Bazarov is a sort of indistinct mixture of Nozdryov and
Byron, _c'est le mot._ Look at them attentively: they caper about and
squeal with joy like puppies in the sun. They are happy, they are
victorious! What is there of Byron in them!... and with that, such
ordinariness! What a low-bred, irritable vanity! What an abject craving
to _faire du bruit autour de son nom,_ without noticing that _son
nom...._ Oh, it's a caricature! 'Surely,' I cried to him, 'you don't want
to offer yourself just as you are as a substitute for Christ?' _Il rit.
Il rit beaucoup. Il rit trop._ He has a strange smile. His mother had not
a smile like that. _Il rit toujours._"

Silence followed again.

"They are cunning; they were acting in collusion on Sunday," he blurted
out suddenly....

"Oh, not a doubt of it," I cried, pricking up my ears. "It was a got-up
thing and it was too transparent, and so badly acted."

"I don't mean that. Do you know that it was all too transparent
on purpose, that those... who had to, might understand it. Do you
understand that?"

"I don't understand."

"_Tant mieux; passons._ I am very irritable to-day."

"But why have you been arguing with him, Stepan Trofimovitch?" I asked
him reproachfully.

"_Je voulais convertir_--you'll laugh of course--_cette pauvre_ auntie,
_elle entendra de belles choses!_ Oh, my dear boy, would you believe it.
I felt like a patriot. I always recognised that I was a Russian,
however... a genuine Russian must be like you and me. _Il y a là dedans
quelque chose d'aveugle et de louche._"

"Not a doubt of it," I assented.

"My dear, the real truth always sounds improbable, do you know that? To
make truth sound probable you must always mix in some falsehood with it.
Men have always done so. Perhaps there's something in it that passes our
understanding. What do you think: is there something we don't understand
in that triumphant squeal? I should like to think there was. I should
like to think so."

I did not speak. He, too, was silent for a long time. "They say that
French cleverness..." he babbled suddenly, as though in a fever...
"that's false, it always has been. Why libel French cleverness? It's
simply Russian indolence, our degrading impotence to produce ideas, our
revolting parasitism in the rank of nations. _Ils sont tout simplement
des paresseux,_ and not French cleverness. Oh, the Russians ought to be
extirpated for the good of humanity, like noxious parasites! We've been
striving for something utterly, utterly different. I can make nothing of
it. I have given up understanding. 'Do you understand,' I cried to him,
'that if you have the guillotine in the foreground of your programme and
are so enthusiastic about it too, it's simply because nothing's easier
than cutting off heads, and nothing's harder than to have an idea. _Vous
êtes des paresseux! Votre drapeau est un guenille, une impuissance._ It's
those carts, or, what was it?... the rumble of the carts carrying bread
to humanity being more important than the Sistine Madonna, or, what's
the saying?... _une bêtise dans ce genre._ Don't you understand, don't you
understand,' I said to him, 'that unhappiness is just as necessary to
man as happiness.' _Il rit._ 'All you do is to make a _bon mot,_' he
said, 'with your limbs snug on a velvet sofa.'... (He used a coarser
expression.) And this habit of addressing a father so familiarly is very
nice when father and son are on good terms, but what do you think of it
when they are abusing one another?"

We were silent again for a minute.

_"Cher,"_ he concluded at last, getting up quickly, "do you know this is
bound to end in something?"

"Of course," said I.

"_Vous ne comprenez pas. Passons._ But... usually in our world things come
to nothing, but this will end in something; it's bound to, it's bound
to!"

He got up, and walked across the room in violent emotion, and coming
back to the sofa sank on to it exhausted.

On Friday morning, Pyotr Stepanovitch went off somewhere in the
neighbourhood, and remained away till Monday. I heard of his departure
from Liputin, and in the course of conversation I learned that the
Lebyadkins, brother and sister, had moved to the riverside quarter.
"I moved them," he added, and, dropping the Lebyadkins, he suddenly
announced to me that Lizaveta Nikolaevna was going to marry Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, that, although it had not been announced, the engagement
was a settled thing. Next day I met Lizaveta Nikolaevna out riding with
Mavriky Nikolaevitch; she was out for the first time after her illness.
She beamed at me from the distance, laughed, and nodded in a very
friendly way. I told all this to Stepan Trofimovitch; he paid no
attention, except to the news about the Lebyadkins.

And now, having described our enigmatic position throughout those eight
days during which we knew nothing, I will pass on to the description of
the succeeding incidents of my chronicle, writing, so to say, with full
knowledge, and describing things as they became known afterwards, and
are clearly seen to-day. I will begin with the eighth day after that
Sunday, that is, the Monday evening--for in reality a "new scandal"
began with that evening.


III

It was seven o'clock in the evening. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was sitting
alone in his study--the room he had been fond of in old days. It was
lofty, carpeted with rugs, and contained somewhat heavy old-fashioned
furniture. He was sitting on the sofa in the corner, dressed as though
to go out, though he did not seem to be intending to do so. On the table
before him stood a lamp with a shade. The sides and corners of the big
room were left in shadow. His eyes looked dreamy and concentrated,
not altogether tranquil; his face looked tired and had grown a little
thinner. He really was ill with a swollen face; but the story of a tooth
having been knocked out was an exaggeration. One had been loosened, but
it had grown into its place again: he had had a cut on the inner side of
the upper lip, but that, too, had healed. The swelling on his face had
lasted all the week simply because the invalid would not have a doctor,
and instead of having the swelling lanced had waited for it to go down.
He would not hear of a doctor, and would scarcely allow even his mother
to come near him, and then only for a moment, once a day, and only at
dusk, after it was dark and before lights had been brought in. He did
not receive Pyotr Stepanovitch either, though the latter ran round to
Varvara Petrovna's two or three times a day so long as he remained in
the town. And now, at last, returning on the Monday morning after his
three days' absence, Pyotr Stepanovitch made a circuit of the town,
and, after dining at Yulia Mihailovna's, came at last in the evening to
Varvara Petrovna, who was impatiently expecting him. The interdict had
been removed, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was "at home." Varvara Petrovna
herself led the visitor to the door of the study; she had long looked
forward to their meeting, and Pyotr Stepanovitch had promised to run
to her and repeat what passed. She knocked timidly at Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch's door, and getting no answer ventured to open the door
a couple of inches.

"Nicolas, may I bring Pyotr Stepanovitch in to see you?" she asked, in a
soft and restrained voice, trying to make out her son's face behind the
lamp.

"You can--you can, of course you can," Pyotr Stepanovitch himself cried
out, loudly and gaily. He opened the door with his hand and went in.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had not heard the knock at the door, and only
caught his mother's timid question, and had not had time to answer it.
Before him, at that moment, there lay a letter he had just read over,
which he was pondering deeply. He started, hearing Pyotr Stepanovitch's
sudden outburst, and hurriedly put the letter under a paper-weight,
but did not quite succeed; a corner of the letter and almost the whole
envelope showed.

"I called out on purpose that you might be prepared," Pyotr Stepanovitch
said hurriedly, with surprising naïveté, running up to the table, and
instantly staring at the corner of the letter, which peeped out from
beneath the paper-weight.

"And no doubt you had time to see how I hid the letter I had just
received, under the paper-weight," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch calmly,
without moving from his place.

"A letter? Bless you and your letters, what are they to do with me?"
cried the visitor. "But... what does matter..." he whispered again,
turning to the door, which was by now closed, and nodding his head in
that direction.

"She never listens," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch observed coldly.

"What if she did overhear?" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, raising his voice
cheerfully, and settling down in an arm-chair. "I've nothing against
that, only I've come here now to speak to you alone. Well, at last I've
succeeded in getting at you. First of all, how are you? I see you're
getting on splendidly. To-morrow you'll show yourself again--eh?"

"Perhaps."

"Set their minds at rest. Set mine at rest at last." He gesticulated
violently with a jocose and amiable air. "If only you knew what nonsense
I've had to talk to them. You know, though." He laughed.

"I don't know everything. I only heard from my mother that you've
been... very active."

"Oh, well, I've said nothing definite," Pyotr Stepanovitch flared up
at once, as though defending himself from an awful attack. "I simply
trotted out Shatov's wife; you know, that is, the rumours of your
liaison in Paris, which accounted, of course, for what happened on
Sunday. You're not angry?"

"I'm sure you've done your best."

"Oh, that's just what I was afraid of. Though what does that mean, 'done
your best'? That's a reproach, isn't it? You always go straight for
things, though.... What I was most afraid of, as I came here, was that
you wouldn't go straight for the point."

"I don't want to go straight for anything," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
with some irritation. But he laughed at once.

"I didn't mean that, I didn't mean that, don't make a mistake," cried
Pyotr Stepanovitch, waving his hands, rattling his words out like peas,
and at once relieved at his companion's irritability. "I'm not going to
worry you with _our_ business, especially in your present position. I've
only come about Sunday's affair, and only to arrange the most necessary
steps, because, you see, it's impossible. I've come with the frankest
explanations which I stand in more need of than you--so much for your
vanity, but at the same time it's true. I've come to be open with you
from this time forward."

"Then you have not been open with me before?"

"You know that yourself. I've been cunning with you many times... you
smile; I'm very glad of that smile as a prelude to our explanation. I
provoked that smile on purpose by using the word 'cunning,' so that you
might get cross directly at my daring to think I could be cunning, so
that I might have a chance of explaining myself at once. You see, you
see how open I have become now! Well, do you care to listen?"

In the expression of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's face, which was
contemptuously composed, and even ironical, in spite of his visitor's
obvious desire to irritate him by the insolence of his premeditated
and intentionally coarse naïvetés, there was, at last, a look of rather
uneasy curiosity.

"Listen," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, wriggling more than ever, "when I set
off to come here, I mean here in the large sense, to this town, ten days
ago, I made up my mind, of course, to assume a character. It would
have been best to have done without anything, to have kept one's
own character, wouldn't it? There is no better dodge than one's own
character, because no one believes in it. I meant, I must own, to assume
the part of a fool, because it is easier to be a fool than to act
one's own character; but as a fool is after all something extreme,
and anything extreme excites curiosity, I ended by sticking to my own
character. And what is my own character? The golden mean: neither wise
nor foolish, rather stupid, and dropped from the moon, as sensible
people say here, isn't that it?"

"Perhaps it is," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with a faint smile.

"Ah, you agree--I'm very glad; I knew beforehand that it was your own
opinion.... You needn't trouble, I am not annoyed, and I didn't describe
myself in that way to get a flattering contradiction from you--no,
you're not stupid, you're clever.... Ah! you're smiling again! ... I've
blundered once more. You would not have said 'you're clever,' granted;
I'll let it pass anyway. _Passons,_ as papa says, and, in parenthesis,
don't be vexed with my verbosity. By the way, I always say a lot, that
is, use a great many words and talk very fast, and I never speak well.
And why do I use so many words, and why do I never speak well? Because
I don't know how to speak. People who can speak well, speak briefly. So
that I am stupid, am I not? But as this gift of stupidity is natural
to me, why shouldn't I make skilful use of it? And I do make use of it.
It's true that as I came here, I did think, at first, of being silent.
But you know silence is a great talent, and therefore incongruous for
me, and secondly silence would be risky, anyway. So I made up my mind
finally that it would be best to talk, but to talk stupidly--that is, to
talk and talk and talk--to be in a tremendous hurry to explain things,
and in the end to get muddled in my own explanations, so that my
listener would walk away without hearing the end, with a shrug, or,
better still, with a curse. You succeed straight off in persuading them
of your simplicity, in boring them and in being incomprehensible--three
advantages all at once! Do you suppose anybody will suspect you of
mysterious designs after that? Why, every one of them would take it as
a personal affront if anyone were to say I had secret designs. And I
sometimes amuse them too, and that's priceless. Why, they're ready to
forgive me everything now, just because the clever fellow who used
to publish manifestoes out there turns out to be stupider than
themselves--that's so, isn't it? From your smile I see you approve."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was not smiling at all, however.

On the contrary, he was listening with a frown and some impatience.

"Eh? What? I believe you said 'no matter.'"

Pyotr Stepanovitch rattled on. (Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had said nothing
at all.) "Of course, of course. I assure you I'm not here to compromise
you by my company, by claiming you as my comrade. But do you know you're
horribly captious to-day; I ran in to you with a light and open heart,
and you seem to be laying up every word I say against me. I assure you
I'm not going to begin about anything shocking to-day, I give you my
word, and I agree beforehand to all your conditions."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was obstinately silent.

"Eh? What? Did you say something? I see, I see that I've made a blunder
again, it seems; you've not suggested conditions and you're not going
to; I believe you, I believe you; well, you can set your mind at rest;
I know, of course, that it's not worth while for me to suggest them, is
it? I'll answer for you beforehand, and--just from stupidity, of course;
stupidity again.... You're laughing? Eh? What?"

"Nothing," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch laughed at last. "I just remembered
that I really did call you stupid, but you weren't there then, so they
must have repeated it.... I would ask you to make haste and come to the
point."

"Why, but I am at the point! I am talking about Sunday," babbled Pyotr
Stepanovitch. "Why, what was I on Sunday? What would you call it? Just
fussy, mediocre stupidity, and in the stupidest way I took possession of
the conversation by force. But they forgave me everything, first because
I dropped from the moon, that seems to be settled here, now, by every
one; and, secondly, because I told them a pretty little story, and got
you all out of a scrape, didn't they, didn't they?"

"That is, you told your story so as to leave them in doubt and suggest
some compact and collusion between us, when there was no collusion and
I'd not asked you to do anything."

"Just so, just so!" Pyotr Stepanovitch caught him up, apparently
delighted. "That's just what I did do, for I wanted you to see that I
implied it; I exerted myself chiefly for your sake, for I caught you and
wanted to compromise you, above all I wanted to find out how far you're
afraid."

"It would be interesting to know why you are so open now?"

"Don't be angry, don't be angry, don't glare at me.... You're not,
though. You wonder why I am so open? Why, just because it's all changed
now; of course, it's over, buried under the sand. I've suddenly changed
my ideas about you. The old way is closed; now I shall never compromise
you in the old way, it will be in a new way now."

"You've changed your tactics?"

"There are no tactics. Now it's for you to decide in everything, that
is, if you want to, say yes, and if you want to, say no. There you have
my new tactics. And I won't say a word about our cause till you bid me
yourself. You laugh? Laugh away. I'm laughing myself. But I'm in earnest
now, in earnest, in earnest, though a man who is in such a hurry is
stupid, isn't he? Never mind, I may be stupid, but I'm in earnest, in
earnest."

He really was speaking in earnest in quite a different tone, and with a
peculiar excitement, so that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at him with
curiosity.

"You say you've changed your ideas about me?" he asked.

"I changed my ideas about you at the moment when you drew your hands
back after Shatov's attack, and, that's enough, that's enough, no
questions, please, I'll say nothing more now."

He jumped up, waving his hands as though waving off questions. But as
there were no questions, and he had no reason to go away, he sank into
an arm-chair again, somewhat reassured.

"By the way, in parenthesis," he rattled on at once, "some people here
are babbling that you'll kill him, and taking bets about it, so that
Lembke positively thought of setting the police on, but Yulia Mihailovna
forbade it.... But enough about that, quite enough, I only spoke of it
to let you know. By the way, I moved the Lebyadkins the same day, you
know; did you get my note with their address?"

"I received it at the time."

"I didn't do that by way of 'stupidity.' I did it genuinely, to serve
you. If it was stupid, anyway, it was done in good faith."

"Oh, all right, perhaps it was necessary...." said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch dreamily, "only don't write any more letters to me, I
beg you."

"Impossible to avoid it. It was only one."

"So Liputin knows?"

"Impossible to help it: but Liputin, you know yourself, dare not... By
the way, you ought to meet our fellows, that is, _the_ fellows not _our_
fellows, or you'll be finding fault again. Don't disturb yourself,
not just now, but sometime. Just now it's raining. I'll let them know,
they'll meet together, and we'll go in the evening. They're waiting,
with their mouths open like young crows in a nest, to see what present
we've brought them. They're a hot-headed lot. They've brought out
leaflets, they're on the point of quarrelling. Virginsky is a universal
humanity man, Liputin is a Fourierist with a marked inclination for
police work; a man, I assure you, who is precious from one point of
view, though he requires strict supervision in all others; and, last of
all, that fellow with the long ears, he'll read an account of his own
system. And do you know, they're offended at my treating them casually,
and throwing cold water over them, but we certainly must meet."

"You've made me out some sort of chief?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch dropped
as carelessly as possible.

Pyotr Stepanovitch looked quickly at him.

"By the way," he interposed, in haste to change the subject, as though
he had not heard. "I've been here two or three times, you know, to see
her excellency, Varvara Petrovna, and I have been obliged to say a great
deal too."

"So I imagine."

"No, don't imagine, I've simply told her that you won't kill him, well,
and other sweet things. And only fancy; the very next day she knew I'd
moved Marya Timofyevna beyond the river. Was it you told her?"

"I never dreamed of it!"

"I knew it wasn't you. Who else could it be? It's interesting."

"Liputin, of course."

"N-no, not Liputin," muttered Pyotr Stepanovitch, frowning; "I'll find
out who. It's more like Shatov.... That's nonsense though. Let's leave
that! Though it's awfully important.... By the way, I kept expecting
that your mother would suddenly burst out with the great question....
Ach! yes, she was horribly glum at first, but suddenly, when I came
to-day, she was beaming all over, what does that mean?"

"It's because I promised her to-day that within five days I'll be
engaged to Lizaveta Nikolaevna," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch said with
surprising openness.

"Oh!... Yes, of course," faltered Pyotr Stepanovitch, seeming
disconcerted. "There are rumours of her engagement, you know. It's true,
too. But you're right, she'd run from under the wedding crown, you've
only to call to her. You're not angry at my saying so?"

"No, I'm not angry."

"I notice it's awfully hard to make you angry to-day, and I begin to be
afraid of you. I'm awfully curious to know how you'll appear to-morrow.
I expect you've got a lot of things ready. You're not angry at my saying
so?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch made no answer at all, which completed Pyotr
Stepanovitch's irritation.

"By the way, did you say that in earnest to your mother, about Lizaveta
Nikolaevna?" he asked.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked coldly at him.

"Oh, I understand, it was only to soothe her, of course."

"And if it were in earnest?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked firmly.

"Oh, God bless you then, as they say in such cases. It won't hinder the
cause (you see, I don't say 'our,' you don't like the word 'our') and I
... well, I... am at your service, as you know."

"You think so?"

"I think nothing--nothing," Pyotr Stepanovitch hurriedly declared,
laughing, "because I know you consider what you're about beforehand for
yourself, and everything with you has been thought out. I only mean that
I am seriously at your service, always and everywhere, and in every sort
of circumstance, every sort really, do you understand that?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch yawned.

"I've bored you," Pyotr Stepanovitch cried, jumping up suddenly, and
snatching his perfectly new round hat as though he were going away. He
remained and went on talking, however, though he stood up, sometimes
pacing about the room and tapping himself on the knee with his hat at
exciting parts of the conversation.

"I meant to amuse you with stories of the Lembkes, too," he cried gaily.

"Afterwards, perhaps, not now. But how is Yulia Mihailovna?"

"What conventional manners all of you have! Her health is no more to
you than the health of the grey cat, yet you ask after it. I approve
of that. She's quite well, and her respect for you amounts to a
superstition, her immense anticipations of you amount to a superstition.
She does not say a word about what happened on Sunday, and is convinced
that you will overcome everything yourself by merely making your
appearance. Upon my word! She fancies you can do anything. You're an
enigmatic and romantic figure now, more than ever you were--extremely
advantageous position. It is incredible how eager every one is to see
you. They were pretty hot when I went away, but now it is more so than
ever. Thanks again for your letter. They are all afraid of Count K. Do
you know they look upon you as a spy? I keep that up, you're not angry?"

"It does not matter."

"It does not matter; it's essential in the long run. They have their
ways of doing things here. I encourage it, of course; Yulia Mihailovna,
in the first place, Gaganov too.... You laugh? But you know I have my
policy; I babble away and suddenly I say something clever just as they
are on the look-out for it. They crowd round me and I humbug away again.
They've all given me up in despair by now: 'he's got brains but he's
dropped from the moon.' Lembke invites me to enter the service so that
I may be reformed. You know I treat him mockingly, that is, I compromise
him and he simply stares, Yulia Mihailovna encourages it. Oh, by the
way, Gaganov is in an awful rage with you. He said the nastiest things
about you yesterday at Duhovo. I told him the whole truth on the spot,
that is, of course, not the whole truth. I spent the whole day at
Duhovo. It's a splendid estate, a fine house."

"Then is he at Duhovo now?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch broke in suddenly,
making a sudden start forward and almost leaping up from his seat.

"No, he drove me here this morning, we returned together," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, appearing not to notice Stavrogin's momentary excitement.
"What's this? I dropped a book." He bent down to pick up the "keepsake"
he had knocked down. 'The Women of Balzac,' with illustrations." He
opened it suddenly. "I haven't read it. Lembke writes novels too."

"Yes?" queried Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, as though beginning to be
interested.

"In Russian, on the sly, of course, Yulia Mihailovna knows and allows
it. He's henpecked, but with good manners; it's their system. Such
strict form--such self-restraint! Something of the sort would be the
thing for us."

"You approve of government methods?"

"I should rather think so! It's the one thing that's natural and
practicable in Russia.... I won't... I won't," he cried out suddenly,
"I'm not referring to that--not a word on delicate subjects. Good-bye,
though, you look rather green."

"I'm feverish."

"I can well believe it; you should go to bed. By the way, there are
Skoptsi here in the neighbourhood--they're curious people... of that
later, though. Ah, here's another anecdote. There's an infantry regiment
here in the district. I was drinking last Friday evening with the
officers. We've three friends among them, _vous comprenez?_ They were
discussing atheism and I need hardly say they made short work of God.
They were squealing with delight. By the way, Shatov declares that if
there's to be a rising in Russia we must begin with atheism. Maybe it's
true. One grizzled old stager of a captain sat mum, not saying a word.
All at once he stands up in the middle of the room and says aloud, as
though speaking to himself: 'If there's no God, how can I be a captain
then?' He took up his cap and went out, flinging up his hands."

"He expressed a rather sensible idea," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
yawning for the third time.

"Yes? I didn't understand it; I meant to ask you about it. Well what
else have I to tell you? The Shpigulin factory's interesting; as you
know, there are five hundred workmen in it, it's a hotbed of cholera,
it's not been cleaned for fifteen years and the factory hands are
swindled. The owners are millionaires. I assure you that some among
the hands have an idea of the _Internationale._ What, you smile? You'll
see--only give me ever so little time! I've asked you to fix the time
already and now I ask you again and then.... But I beg your pardon,
I won't, I won't speak of that, don't frown. There!" He turned back
suddenly. "I quite forgot the chief thing. I was told just now that our
box had come from Petersburg."

"You mean..." Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at him, not understanding.

"Your box, your things, coats, trousers, and linen have come. Is it
true?"

"Yes... they said something about it this morning."

"Ach, then can't I open it at once!..."

"Ask Alexey."

"Well, to-morrow, then, will to-morrow do? You see my new jacket,
dress-coat and three pairs of trousers are with your things, from
Sharmer's, by your recommendation, do you remember?"

"I hear you're going in for being a gentleman here," said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch with a smile. "Is it true you're going to take lessons
at the riding school?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch smiled a wry smile. "I say," he said suddenly, with
excessive haste in a voice that quivered and faltered, "I say, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, let's drop personalities once for all. Of course, you
can despise me as much as you like if it amuses you--but we'd better
dispense with personalities for a time, hadn't we?"

"All right," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch assented.

Pyotr Stepanovitch grinned, tapped his knee with his hat, shifted from
one leg to the other, and recovered his former expression.

"Some people here positively look upon me as your rival with Lizaveta
Nikolaevna, so I must think of my appearance, mustn't I," he laughed.
"Who was it told you that though? H'm. It's just eight o'clock; well I
must be off. I promised to look in on Varvara Petrovna, but I shall
make my escape. And you go to bed and you'll be stronger to-morrow. It's
raining and dark, but I've a cab, it's not over safe in the streets here
at night.... Ach, by the way, there's a run-away convict from Siberia,
Fedka, wandering about the town and the neighbourhood. Only fancy, he
used to be a serf of mine, and my papa sent him for a soldier fifteen
years ago and took the money for him. He's a very remarkable person."

