"You have been talking to him?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch scanned him.

"I have. He lets me know where he is. He's ready for anything, anything,
for money of course, but he has convictions, too, of a sort, of course.
Oh yes, by the way, again, if you meant anything of that plan, you
remember, about Lizaveta Nikolaevna, I tell you once again, I too am a
fellow ready for anything of any kind you like, and absolutely at
your service.... Hullo! are you reaching for your stick. Oh no... only
fancy... I thought you were looking for your stick."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was looking for nothing and said nothing.

But he had risen to his feet very suddenly with a strange look in his
face.

"If you want any help about Mr. Gaganov either," Pyotr Stepanovitch
blurted out suddenly, this time looking straight at the paper-weight,
"of course I can arrange it all, and I'm certain you won't be able to
manage without me."

He went out suddenly without waiting for an answer, but thrust his
head in at the door once more. "I mention that," he gabbled hurriedly,
"because Shatov had no right either, you know, to risk his life last
Sunday when he attacked you, had he? I should be glad if you would make
a note of that." He disappeared again without waiting for an answer.


IV

Perhaps he imagined, as he made his exit, that as soon as he was left
alone, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch would begin beating on the wall with his
fists, and no doubt he would have been glad to see this, if that
had been possible. But, if so, he was greatly mistaken. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was still calm. He remained standing for two minutes in
the same position by the table, apparently plunged in thought, but soon
a cold and listless smile came on to his lips. He slowly sat down again
in the same place in the corner of the sofa, and shut his eyes as though
from weariness. The corner of the letter was still peeping from under
the paperweight, but he didn't even move to cover it.

He soon sank into complete forgetfulness.

When Pyotr Stepanovitch went out without coming to see her, as he had
promised, Varvara Petrovna, who had been worn out by anxiety during
these days, could not control herself, and ventured to visit her son
herself, though it was not her regular time. She was still haunted by
the idea that he would tell her something conclusive. She knocked at
the door gently as before, and again receiving no answer, she opened
the door. Seeing that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was sitting strangely
motionless, she cautiously advanced to the sofa with a throbbing heart.
She seemed struck by the fact that he could fall asleep so quickly and
that he could sleep sitting like that, so erect and motionless, so
that his breathing even was scarcely perceptible. His face was pale and
forbidding, but it looked, as it were, numb and rigid. His brows were
somewhat contracted and frowning. He positively had the look of a
lifeless wax figure. She stood over him for about three minutes,
almost holding her breath, and suddenly she was seized with terror. She
withdrew on tiptoe, stopped at the door, hurriedly made the sign of the
cross over him, and retreated unobserved, with a new oppression and a
new anguish at her heart.

He slept a long while, more than an hour, and still in the same rigid
pose: not a muscle of his face twitched, there was not the faintest
movement in his whole body, and his brows were still contracted in the
same forbidding frown. If Varvara Petrovna had remained another three
minutes she could not have endured the stifling sensation that this
motionless lethargy roused in her, and would have waked him. But he
suddenly opened his eyes, and sat for ten minutes as immovable as
before, staring persistently and curiously, as though at some object
in the corner which had struck him, although there was nothing new or
striking in the room.

Suddenly there rang out the low deep note of the clock on the wall.

With some uneasiness he turned to look at it, but almost at the same
moment the other door opened, and the butler, Alexey Yegorytch came in.
He had in one hand a greatcoat, a scarf, and a hat, and in the other a
silver tray with a note on it.

"Half-past nine," he announced softly, and laying the other things on a
chair, he held out the tray with the note--a scrap of paper unsealed and
scribbled in pencil. Glancing through it, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch took
a pencil from the table, added a few words, and put the note back on the
tray.

"Take it back as soon as I have gone out, and now dress me," he said,
getting up from the sofa.

Noticing that he had on a light velvet jacket, he thought a minute,
and told the man to bring him a cloth coat, which he wore on more
ceremonious occasions. At last, when he was dressed and had put on his
hat, he locked the door by which his mother had come into the room, took
the letter from under the paperweight, and without saying a word went
out into the corridor, followed by Alexey Yegorytch. From the corridor
they went down the narrow stone steps of the back stairs to a passage
which opened straight into the garden. In the corner stood a lantern and
a big umbrella.

"Owing to the excessive rain the mud in the streets is beyond anything,"
Alexey Yegorytch announced, making a final effort to deter his master
from the expedition. But opening his umbrella the latter went without
a word into the damp and sodden garden, which was dark as a cellar. The
wind was roaring and tossing the bare tree-tops. The little sandy
paths were wet and slippery. Alexey Yegorytch walked along as he was,
bareheaded, in his swallow-tail coat, lighting up the path for about
three steps before them with the lantern.

"Won't it be noticed?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked suddenly.

"Not from the windows. Besides I have seen to all that already," the old
servant answered in quiet and measured tones.

"Has my mother retired?"

"Her excellency locked herself in at nine o'clock as she has done the
last few days, and there is no possibility of her knowing anything. At
what hour am I to expect your honour?"

"At one or half-past, not later than two."

"Yes, sir."

Crossing the garden by the winding paths that they both knew by heart,
they reached the stone wall, and there in the farthest corner found
a little door, which led out into a narrow and deserted lane, and was
always kept locked. It appeared that Alexey Yegorytch had the key in his
hand.

"Won't the door creak?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch inquired again.

But Alexey Yegorytch informed him that it had been oiled yesterday "as
well as to-day." He was by now wet through. Unlocking the door he gave
the key to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"If it should be your pleasure to be taking a distant walk, I would warn
your honour that I am not confident of the folk here, especially in
the back lanes, and especially beyond the river," he could not resist
warning him again. He was an old servant, who had been like a nurse to
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, and at one time used to dandle him in his arms;
he was a grave and severe man who was fond of listening to religious
discourse and reading books of devotion.

"Don't be uneasy, Alexey Yegorytch."

"May God's blessing rest on you, sir, but only in your righteous
undertakings."

"What?" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, stopping short in the lane.

Alexey Yegorytch resolutely repeated his words. He had never before
ventured to express himself in such language in his master's presence.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch locked the door, put the key in his pocket, and
crossed the lane, sinking five or six inches into the mud at every step.
He came out at last into a long deserted street. He knew the town like
the five fingers of his hand, but Bogoyavlensky Street was a long way
off. It was past ten when he stopped at last before the locked gates of
the dark old house that belonged to Filipov. The ground floor had stood
empty since the Lebyadkins had left it, and the windows were boarded up,
but there was a light burning in Shatov's room on the second floor. As
there was no bell he began banging on the gate with his hand. A window
was opened and Shatov peeped out into the street. It was terribly dark,
and difficult to make out anything. Shatov was peering out for some
time, about a minute.

"Is that you?" he asked suddenly.

"Yes," replied the uninvited guest.

Shatov slammed the window, went downstairs and opened the gate. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch stepped over the high sill, and without a word passed by
him straight into Kirillov's lodge.


V

There everything was unlocked and all the doors stood open. The passage
and the first two rooms were dark, but there was a light shining in the
last, in which Kirillov lived and drank tea, and laughter and strange
cries came from it. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went towards the light, but
stood still in the doorway without going in. There was tea on the table.
In the middle of the room stood the old woman who was a relation of the
landlord. She was bareheaded and was dressed in a petticoat and a
hare-skin jacket, and her stockingless feet were thrust into slippers.
In her arms she had an eighteen-months-old baby, with nothing on but its
little shirt; with bare legs, flushed cheeks, and ruffled white hair. It
had only just been taken out of the cradle. It seemed to have just been
crying; there were still tears in its eyes. But at that instant it was
stretching out its little arms, clapping its hands, and laughing with a
sob as little children do. Kirillov was bouncing a big red india-rubber
ball on the floor before it. The ball bounced up to the ceiling, and back
to the floor, the baby shrieked "Baw! baw!" Kirillov caught the "baw",
and gave it to it. The baby threw it itself with its awkward little hands,
and Kirillov ran to pick it up again.

At last the "baw" rolled under the cupboard. "Baw! baw!" cried the
child. Kirillov lay down on the floor, trying to reach the ball with his
hand under the cupboard. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went into the room. The
baby caught sight of him, nestled against the old woman, and went off
into a prolonged infantile wail. The woman immediately carried it out of
the room.

"Stavrogin?" said Kirillov, beginning to get up from the floor with the
ball in his hand, and showing no surprise at the unexpected visit. "Will
you have tea?"

He rose to his feet.

"I should be very glad of it, if it's hot," said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch; "I'm wet through."

"It's hot, nearly boiling in fact," Kirillov declared delighted. "Sit
down. You're muddy, but that's nothing; I'll mop up the floor later."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat down and emptied the cup he handed him
almost at a gulp.

"Some more?" asked Kirillov.

"No, thank you."

Kirillov, who had not sat down till then, seated himself facing him, and
inquired:

"Why have you come?"

"On business. Here, read this letter from Gaganov; do you remember, I
talked to you about him in Petersburg."

Kirillov took the letter, read it, laid it on the table and looked at
him expectantly.

"As you know, I met this Gaganov for the first time in my life a month
ago, in Petersburg," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch began to explain. "We
came across each other two or three times in company with other people.
Without making my acquaintance and without addressing me, he managed to
be very insolent to me. I told you so at the time; but now for something
you don't know. As he was leaving Petersburg before I did, he sent me
a letter, not like this one, yet impertinent in the highest degree, and
what was queer about it was that it contained no sort of explanation of
why it was written. I answered him at once, also by letter, and said,
quite frankly, that he was probably angry with me on account of the
incident with his father four years ago in the club here, and that I for
my part was prepared to make him every possible apology, seeing that my
action was unintentional and was the result of illness. I begged him to
consider and accept my apologies. He went away without answering, and
now here I find him in a regular fury. Several things he has said about
me in public have been repeated to me, absolutely abusive, and making
astounding charges against me. Finally, to-day, I get this letter, a
letter such as no one has ever had before, I should think, containing
such expressions as 'the punch you got in your ugly face.' I came in the
hope that you would not refuse to be my second."

"You said no one has ever had such a letter," observed Kirillov, "they
may be sent in a rage. Such letters have been written more than once.
Pushkin wrote to Hekern. All right, I'll come. Tell me how."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch explained that he wanted it to be to-morrow, and
that he must begin by renewing his offers of apology, and even with the
promise of another letter of apology, but on condition that Gaganov,
on his side, should promise to send no more letters. The letter he had
received he would regard as unwritten.

"Too much concession; he won't agree," said Kirillov.

"I've come first of all to find out whether you would consent to be the
bearer of such terms."

"I'll take them. It's your affair. But he won't agree."

"I know he won't agree."

"He wants to fight. Say how you'll fight."

"The point is that I want the thing settled to-morrow. By nine o'clock
in the morning you must be at his house. He'll listen, and won't agree,
but will put you in communication with his second--let us say about
eleven. You will arrange things with him, and let us all be on the
spot by one or two o'clock. Please try to arrange that. The weapons, of
course, will be pistols. And I particularly beg you to arrange to fix
the barriers at ten paces apart; then you put each of us ten paces from
the barrier, and at a given signal we approach. Each must go right up to
his barrier, but you may fire before, on the way. I believe that's all."

"Ten paces between the barriers is very near," observed Kirillov.

"Well, twelve then, but not more. You understand that he wants to fight
in earnest. Do you know how to load a pistol?"

"I do. I've got pistols. I'll give my word that you've never fired
them. His second will give his word about his. There'll be two pairs of
pistols, and we'll toss up, his or ours?"

"Excellent."

"Would you like to look at the pistols?"

"Very well."

Kirillov squatted on his heels before the trunk in the corner, which
he had never yet unpacked, though things had been pulled out of it as
required. He pulled out from the bottom a palm-wood box lined with red
velvet, and from it took out a pair of smart and very expensive pistols.

"I've got everything, powder, bullets, cartridges. I've a revolver
besides, wait."

He stooped down to the trunk again and took out a six-chambered American
revolver.

"You've got weapons enough, and very good ones."

"Very, extremely."

Kirillov, who was poor, almost destitute, though he never noticed his
poverty, was evidently proud of showing precious weapons, which he had
certainly obtained with great sacrifice.

"You still have the same intentions?" Stavrogin asked after a moment's
silence, and with a certain wariness.

"Yes," answered Kirillov shortly, guessing at once from his voice what
he was asking about, and he began taking the weapons from the table.

"When?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch inquired still more cautiously, after a
pause.

In the meantime Kirillov had put both the boxes back in his trunk, and
sat down in his place again.

"That doesn't depend on me, as you know--when they tell me," he
muttered, as though disliking the question; but at the same time with
evident readiness to answer any other question. He kept his black,
lustreless eyes fixed continually on Stavrogin with a calm but warm and
kindly expression in them.

"I understand shooting oneself, of course," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
began suddenly, frowning a little, after a dreamy silence that lasted
three minutes. "I sometimes have thought of it myself, and then there
always came a new idea: if one did something wicked, or, worse still,
something shameful, that is, disgraceful, only very shameful and...
ridiculous, such as people would remember for a thousand years and hold
in scorn for a thousand years, and suddenly the thought comes: 'one blow
in the temple and there would be nothing more.' One wouldn't care then
for men and that they would hold one in scorn for a thousand years,
would one?"

"You call that a new idea?" said Kirillov, after a moment's thought.

"I... didn't call it so, but when I thought it I felt it as a new idea."

"You 'felt the idea'?" observed Kirillov. "That's good. There are lots
of ideas that are always there and yet suddenly become new. That's true.
I see a great deal now as though it were for the first time."

"Suppose you had lived in the moon," Stavrogin interrupted, not
listening, but pursuing his own thought, "and suppose there you had done
all these nasty and ridiculous things.... You know from here for certain
that they will laugh at you and hold you in scorn for a thousand years
as long as the moon lasts. But now you are here, and looking at the moon
from here. You don't care here for anything you've done there, and that
the people there will hold you in scorn for a thousand years, do you?"

"I don't know," answered Kirillov. "I've not been in the moon," he
added, without any irony, simply to state the fact.

"Whose baby was that just now?"

"The old woman's mother-in-law was here--no, daughter-in-law, it's all
the same. Three days. She's lying ill with the baby, it cries a lot at
night, it's the stomach. The mother sleeps, but the old woman picks it
up; I play ball with it. The ball's from Hamburg. I bought it in Hamburg
to throw it and catch it, it strengthens the spine. It's a girl."

"Are you fond of children?"

"I am," answered Kirillov, though rather indifferently.

"Then you're fond of life?"

"Yes, I'm fond of life! What of it?"

"Though you've made up your mind to shoot yourself."

"What of it? Why connect it? Life's one thing and that's another. Life
exists, but death doesn't at all."

"You've begun to believe in a future eternal life?"

"No, not in a future eternal life, but in eternal life here. There are
moments, you reach moments, and time suddenly stands still, and it will
become eternal."

"You hope to reach such a moment?"

"Yes."

"That'll scarcely be possible in our time," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
responded slowly and, as it were, dreamily; the two spoke without the
slightest irony. "In the Apocalypse the angel swears that there will be
no more time."

"I know. That's very true; distinct and exact. When all mankind attains
happiness then there will be no more time, for there'll be no need of
it, a very true thought."

"Where will they put it?"

"Nowhere. Time's not an object but an idea. It will be extinguished in
the mind."

"The old commonplaces of philosophy, the same from the beginning of
time," Stavrogin muttered with a kind of disdainful compassion.

"Always the same, always the same, from the beginning of time and never
any other," Kirillov said with sparkling eyes, as though there were
almost a triumph in that idea.

"You seem to be very happy, Kirillov."

"Yes, very happy," he answered, as though making the most ordinary
reply.

"But you were distressed so lately, angry with Liputin."

"H'm... I'm not scolding now. I didn't know then that I was happy. Have
you seen a leaf, a leaf from a tree?"

"Yes."

"I saw a yellow one lately, a little green. It was decayed at the edges.
It was blown by the wind. When I was ten years old I used to shut my
eyes in the winter on purpose and fancy a green leaf, bright, with veins
on it, and the sun shining. I used to open my eyes and not believe them,
because it was very nice, and I used to shut them again."

"What's that? An allegory?"

"N-no... why? I'm not speaking of an allegory, but of a leaf, only a
leaf. The leaf is good. Everything's good."

"Everything?"

"Everything. Man is unhappy because he doesn't know he's happy. It's
only that. That's all, that's all! If anyone finds out he'll become
happy at once, that minute. That mother-in-law will die; but the baby
will remain. It's all good. I discovered it all of a sudden."

"And if anyone dies of hunger, and if anyone insults and outrages the
little girl, is that good?"

"Yes! And if anyone blows his brains out for the baby, that's good too.
And if anyone doesn't, that's good too. It's all good, all. It's good
for all those who know that it's all good. If they knew that it was good
for them, it would be good for them, but as long as they don't know it's
good for them, it will be bad for them. That's the whole idea, the whole
of it."

"When did you find out you were so happy?"

"Last week, on Tuesday, no, Wednesday, for it was Wednesday by that
time, in the night."

"By what reasoning?"

"I don't remember; I was walking about the room; never mind. I stopped
my clock. It was thirty-seven minutes past two."

"As an emblem of the fact that there will be no more time?"

Kirillov was silent.

"They're bad because they don't know they're good. When they find out,
they won't outrage a little girl. They'll find out that they're good and
they'll all become good, every one of them."

"Here you've found it out, so have you become good then?"

"I am good."

"That I agree with, though," Stavrogin muttered, frowning.

"He who teaches that all are good will end the world."

"He who taught it was crucified."

"He will come, and his name will be the man-god."

"The god-man?"

"The man-god. That's the difference."

"Surely it wasn't you lighted the lamp under the ikon?"

"Yes, it was I lighted it."

"Did you do it believing?"

"The old woman likes to have the lamp and she hadn't time to do it
to-day," muttered Kirillov.

"You don't say prayers yourself?"

"I pray to everything. You see the spider crawling on the wall, I look
at it and thank it for crawling."

His eyes glowed again. He kept looking straight at Stavrogin with
firm and unflinching expression. Stavrogin frowned and watched him
disdainfully, but there was no mockery in his eyes.

"I'll bet that when I come next time you'll be believing in God too,"
he said, getting up and taking his hat.

"Why?" said Kirillov, getting up too.

"If you were to find out that you believe in God, then you'd believe in
Him; but since you don't know that you believe in Him, then you don't
believe in Him," laughed Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"That's not right," Kirillov pondered, "you've distorted the idea. It's
a flippant joke. Remember what you have meant in my life, Stavrogin."

"Good-bye, Kirillov."

"Come at night; when will you?"

"Why, haven't you forgotten about to-morrow?"

"Ach, I'd forgotten. Don't be uneasy. I won't oversleep. At nine
o'clock. I know how to wake up when I want to. I go to bed saying 'seven
o'clock,' and I wake up at seven o'clock, 'ten o'clock,' and I wake up
at ten o'clock."

"You have remarkable powers," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking at
his pale face.

"I'll come and open the gate."

"Don't trouble, Shatov will open it for me."

"Ah, Shatov. Very well, good-bye."


VI

The door of the empty house in which Shatov was lodging was not closed;
but, making his way into the passage, Stavrogin found himself in utter
darkness, and began feeling with his hand for the stairs to the upper
story. Suddenly a door opened upstairs and a light appeared. Shatov
did not come out himself, but simply opened his door. When Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was standing in the doorway of the room, he saw Shatov
standing at the table in the corner, waiting expectantly.

"Will you receive me on business?" he queried from the doorway.

"Come in and sit down," answered Shatov. "Shut the door; stay, I'll shut
it."

He locked the door, returned to the table, and sat down, facing Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. He had grown thinner during that week, and now he
seemed in a fever.

"You've been worrying me to death," he said, looking down, in a soft
half-whisper. "Why didn't you come?"

"You were so sure I should come then?"

"Yes, stay, I have been delirious... perhaps I'm delirious now.... Stay
a moment."

He got up and seized something that was lying on the uppermost of his
three bookshelves. It was a revolver.

"One night, in delirium, I fancied that you were coming to kill me, and
early next morning I spent my last farthing on buying a revolver from
that good-for-nothing fellow Lyamshin; I did not mean to let you do it.
Then I came to myself again... I've neither powder nor shot; it has been
lying there on the shelf till now; wait a minute...."

He got up and was opening the casement.

"Don't throw it away, why should you?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch checked
him. "It's worth something. Besides, tomorrow people will begin saying
that there are revolvers lying about under Shatov's window. Put it back,
that's right; sit down. Tell me, why do you seem to be penitent for
having thought I should come to kill you? I have not come now to be
reconciled, but to talk of something necessary. Enlighten me to begin
with. You didn't give me that blow because of my connection with your
wife?"

"You know I didn't, yourself," said Shatov, looking down again.

"And not because you believed the stupid gossip about Darya Pavlovna?"

"No, no, of course not! It's nonsense! My sister told me from the very
first..." Shatov said, harshly and impatiently, and even with a slight
stamp of his foot.

"Then I guessed right and you too guessed right," Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch went on in a tranquil voice. "You are right. Marya
Timofyevna Lebyadkin is my lawful wife, married to me four and a half
years ago in Petersburg. I suppose the blow was on her account?"

Shatov, utterly astounded, listened in silence.

"I guessed, but did not believe it," he muttered at last, looking
strangely at Stavrogin.

"And you struck me?"

Shatov flushed and muttered almost incoherently:

"Because of your fall... your lie. I didn't go up to you to punish
you... I didn't know when I went up to you that I should strike you... I
did it because you meant so much to me in my life... I..."

"I understand, I understand, spare your words. I am sorry you are
feverish. I've come about a most urgent matter."

"I have been expecting you too long." Shatov seemed to be quivering all
over, and he got up from his seat. "Say what you have to say... I'll
speak too... later."

He sat down.

"What I have come about is nothing of that kind," began Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, scrutinising him with curiosity. "Owing to certain
circumstances I was forced this very day to choose such an hour to come
and tell you that they may murder you."

Shatov looked wildly at him.

"I know that I may be in some danger," he said in measured tones, "but
how can you have come to know of it?"

"Because I belong to them as you do, and am a member of their society,
just as you are."

"You... you are a member of the society?"

"I see from your eyes that you were prepared for anything from me rather
than that," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with a faint smile. "But,
excuse me, you knew then that there would be an attempt on your life?"

"Nothing of the sort. And I don't think so now, in spite of your words,
though... though there's no being sure of anything with these fools!"
he cried suddenly in a fury, striking the table with his fist. "I'm not
afraid of them! I've broken with them. That fellow's run here four times
to tell me it was possible... but"--he looked at Stavrogin--"what do
you know about it, exactly?"

"Don't be uneasy; I am not deceiving you," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went
on, rather coldly, with the air of a man who is only fulfilling a duty.
"You question me as to what I know. I know that you entered that society
abroad, two years ago, at the time of the old organisation, just before
you went to America, and I believe, just after our last conversation,
about which you wrote so much to me in your letter from America. By
the way, I must apologise for not having answered you by letter, but
confined myself to..."

"To sending the money; wait a bit," Shatov interrupted, hurriedly
pulling out a drawer in the table and taking from under some papers a
rainbow-coloured note. "Here, take it, the hundred roubles you sent me;
but for you I should have perished out there. I should have been a long
time paying it back if it had not been for your mother. She made me a
present of that note nine months ago, because I was so badly off after
my illness. But, go on, please...."

He was breathless.

"In America you changed your views, and when you came back you wanted to
resign. They gave you no answer, but charged you to take over a printing
press here in Russia from some one, and to keep it till you handed
it over to some one who would come from them for it. I don't know
the details exactly, but I fancy that's the position in outline. You
undertook it in the hope, or on the condition, that it would be the last
task they would require of you, and that then they would release you
altogether. Whether that is so or not, I learnt it, not from them, but
quite by chance. But now for what I fancy you don't know; these gentry
have no intention of parting with you."

"That's absurd!" cried Shatov. "I've told them honestly that I've cut
myself off from them in everything. That is my right, the right to
freedom of conscience and of thought.... I won't put up with it! There's
no power which could..."

"I say, don't shout," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch said earnestly, checking
him. "That Verhovensky is such a fellow that he may be listening to us
now in your passage, perhaps, with his own ears or some one else's. Even
that drunkard, Lebyadkin, was probably bound to keep an eye on you,
and you on him, too, I dare say? You'd better tell me, has Verhovensky
accepted your arguments now, or not?"

"He has. He has said that it can be done and that I have the right... ."

"Well then, he's deceiving you. I know that even Kirillov, who scarcely
belongs to them at all, has given them information about you. And they
have lots of agents, even people who don't know that they're serving
the society. They've always kept a watch on you. One of the things Pyotr
Verhovensky came here for was to settle your business once for all, and
he is fully authorised to do so, that is at the first good opportunity,
to get rid of you, as a man who knows too much and might give them away.
I repeat that this is certain, and allow me to add that they are, for
some reason, convinced that you are a spy, and that if you haven't
informed against them yet, you will. Is that true?"

Shatov made a wry face at hearing such a question asked in such a
matter-of fact tone.

"If I were a spy, whom could I inform?" he said angrily, not giving a
direct answer. "No, leave me alone, let me go to the devil!" he cried
suddenly, catching again at his original idea, which agitated him
violently. Apparently it affected him more deeply than the news of his
own danger. "You, you, Stavrogin, how could you mix yourself up with
such shameful, stupid, second-hand absurdity? You a member of the
society? What an exploit for Stavrogin!" he cried suddenly, in despair.

He clasped his hands, as though nothing could be a bitterer and more
inconsolable grief to him than such a discovery.

"Excuse me," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, extremely surprised, "but you
seem to look upon me as a sort of sun, and on yourself as an insect in
comparison. I noticed that even from your letter in America."

"You... you know.... Oh, let us drop me altogether," Shatov broke off
suddenly, "and if you can explain anything about yourself explain it....
Answer my question!" he repeated feverishly.

"With pleasure. You ask how I could get into such a den? After what
I have told you, I'm bound to be frank with you to some extent on the
subject. You see, strictly speaking, I don't belong to the society at
all, and I never have belonged to it, and I've much more right than
you to leave them, because I never joined them. In fact, from the very
beginning I told them that I was not one of them, and that if I've
happened to help them it has simply been by accident as a man of
leisure. I took some part in reorganising the society, on the new plan,
but that was all. But now they've changed their views, and have made up
their minds that it would be dangerous to let me go, and I believe I'm
sentenced to death too."

"Oh, they do nothing but sentence to death, and all by means of sealed
documents, signed by three men and a half. And you think they've any
power!"

"You're partly right there and partly not," Stavrogin answered with the
same indifference, almost listlessness. "There's no doubt that there's a
great deal that's fanciful about it, as there always is in such cases: a
handful magnifies its size and significance. To my thinking, if you will
have it, the only one is Pyotr Verhovensky, and it's simply good-nature
on his part to consider himself only an agent of the society. But
the fundamental idea is no stupider than others of the sort. They are
connected with the _Internationale._ They have succeeded in establishing
agents in Russia, they have even hit on a rather original method, though
it's only theoretical, of course. As for their intentions here, the
movements of our Russian organisation are something so obscure and
almost always unexpected that really they might try anything among us.
Note that Verhovensky is an obstinate man."

"He's a bug, an ignoramus, a buffoon, who understands nothing in
Russia!" cried Shatov spitefully.

"You know him very little. It's quite true that none of them understand
much about Russia, but not much less than you and I do. Besides,
Verhovensky is an enthusiast."

"Verhovensky an enthusiast?"

"Oh, yes. There is a point when he ceases to be a buffoon and becomes
a madman. I beg you to remember your own expression: 'Do you know how
powerful a single man may be?' Please don't laugh about it, he's quite
capable of pulling a trigger. They are convinced that I am a spy too.
As they don't know how to do things themselves, they're awfully fond of
accusing people of being spies."

"But you're not afraid, are you?"

"N--no. I'm not very much afraid.... But your case is quite different. I
warned you that you might anyway keep it in mind. To my thinking there's
no reason to be offended in being threatened with danger by fools; their
brains don't affect the question. They've raised their hand against
better men than you or me. It's a quarter past eleven, though." He
looked at his watch and got up from his chair. "I wanted to ask you one
quite irrelevant question."

"For God's sake!" cried Shatov, rising impulsively from his seat.

"I beg your pardon?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at him inquiringly.

"Ask it, ask your question for God's sake," Shatov repeated in
indescribable excitement, "but on condition that I ask you a question
too. I beseech you to allow me... I can't... ask your question!"

Stavrogin waited a moment and then began. "I've heard that you have some
influence on Marya Timofyevna, and that she was fond of seeing you and
hearing you talk. Is that so?"

"Yes... she used to listen..." said Shatov, confused.

"Within a day or two I intend to make a public announcement of our
marriage here in the town."

"Is that possible?" Shatov whispered, almost with horror.

"I don't quite understand you. There's no sort of difficulty about it,
witnesses to the marriage are here. Everything took place in Petersburg,
perfectly legally and smoothly, and if it has not been made known till
now, it is simply because the witnesses, Kirillov, Pyotr Verhovensky,
and Lebyadkin (whom I now have the pleasure of claiming as a
brother-in-law) promised to hold their tongues."

"I don't mean that... You speak so calmly... but good! Listen! You
weren't forced into that marriage, were you?"

"No, no one forced me into it." Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch smiled at
Shatov's importunate haste.

"And what's that talk she keeps up about her baby?" Shatov interposed
disconnectedly, with feverish haste.

"She talks about her baby? Bah! I didn't know. It's the first time
I've heard of it. She never had a baby and couldn't have had: Marya
Timofyevna is a virgin."

"Ah! That's just what I thought! Listen!"

"What's the matter with you, Shatov?"

Shatov hid his face in his hands, turned away, but suddenly clutched
Stavrogin by the shoulders.

"Do you know why, do you know why, anyway," he shouted, "why you did all
this, and why you are resolved on such a punishment now!"

"Your question is clever and malignant, but I mean to surprise you too;
I fancy I do know why I got married then, and why I am resolved on such
a punishment now, as you express it."

"Let's leave that... of that later. Put it off. Let's talk of the chief
thing, the chief thing. I've been waiting two years for you."

"Yes?"

"I've waited too long for you. I've been thinking of you incessantly.
You are the only man who could move... I wrote to you about it from
America."

"I remember your long letter very well."

"Too long to be read? No doubt; six sheets of notepaper. Don't speak!
Don't speak! Tell me, can you spare me another ten minutes?... But now,
this minute... I have waited for you too long."

"Certainly, half an hour if you like, but not more, if that will suit
you."

"And on condition, too," Shatov put in wrathfully, "that you take a
different tone. Do you hear? I demand when I ought to entreat. Do you
understand what it means to demand when one ought to entreat?"

"I understand that in that way you lift yourself above all
ordinary considerations for the sake of loftier aims," said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch with a faint smile. "I see with regret, too, that you're
feverish."

"I beg you to treat me with respect, I insist on it!" shouted Shatov,
"not my personality--I don't care a hang for that, but something else,
just for this once. While I am talking... we are two beings, and have
come together in infinity... for the last time in the world. Drop your
tone, and speak like a human being! Speak, if only for once in your life
with the voice of a man. I say it not for my sake but for yours. Do you
understand that you ought to forgive me that blow in the face if only
because I gave you the opportunity of realising your immense power.
... Again you smile your disdainful, worldly smile! Oh, when will you
understand me! Have done with being a snob! Understand that I insist
on that. I insist on it, else I won't speak, I'm not going to for
anything!"

His excitement was approaching frenzy. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch frowned
and seemed to become more on his guard.

"Since I have remained another half-hour with you when time is so
precious," he pronounced earnestly and impressively, "you may rest
assured that I mean to listen to you at least with interest... and I am
convinced that I shall hear from you much that is new."

He sat down on a chair.

"Sit down!" cried Shatov, and he sat down himself.

"Please remember," Stavrogin interposed once more, "that I was about
to ask a real favour of you concerning Marya Timofyevna, of great
importance for her, anyway...."

"What?" Shatov frowned suddenly with the air of a man who has just been
interrupted at the most important moment, and who gazes at you unable to
grasp the question.

"And you did not let me finish," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went on with a
smile.

"Oh, nonsense, afterwards!" Shatov waved his hand disdainfully,
grasping, at last, what he wanted, and passed at once to his principal
theme.


VII

"Do you know," he began, with flashing eyes, almost menacingly, bending
right forward in his chair, raising the forefinger of his right hand
above him (obviously unaware that he was doing so), "do you know who are
the only 'god-bearing' people on earth, destined to regenerate and save
the world in the name of a new God, and to whom are given the keys of
life and of the new world... Do you know which is that people and what
is its name?"

"From your manner I am forced to conclude, and I think I may as well do
so at once, that it is the Russian people."

"And you can laugh, oh, what a race!" Shatov burst out.

"Calm yourself, I beg of you; on the contrary, I was expecting something
of the sort from you."

"You expected something of the sort? And don't you know those words
yourself?"

"I know them very well. I see only too well what you're driving at. All
your phrases, even the expression 'god-bearing people' is only a sequel
to our talk two years ago, abroad, not long before you went to America.
... At least, as far as I can recall it now."

"It's your phrase altogether, not mine. Your own, not simply the sequel
of our conversation. 'Our' conversation it was not at all. It was a
teacher uttering weighty words, and a pupil who was raised from the
dead. I was that pupil and you were the teacher."

"But, if you remember, it was just after my words you joined their
society, and only afterwards went away to America."

"Yes, and I wrote to you from America about that. I wrote to you about
everything. Yes, I could not at once tear my bleeding heart from what
I had grown into from childhood, on which had been lavished all the
raptures of my hopes and all the tears of my hatred.... It is difficult
to change gods. I did not believe you then, because I did not want to
believe, I plunged for the last time into that sewer.... But the seed
remained and grew up. Seriously, tell me seriously, didn't you read all
my letter from America, perhaps you didn't read it at all?"

"I read three pages of it. The two first and the last. And I glanced
through the middle as well. But I was always meaning..."

"Ah, never mind, drop it! Damn it!" cried Shatov, waving his hand. "If
you've renounced those words about the people now, how could you have
uttered them then?... That's what crushes me now."

"I wasn't joking with you then; in persuading you I was perhaps
more concerned with myself than with you," Stavrogin pronounced
enigmatically.

"You weren't joking! In America I was lying for three months on straw
beside a hapless creature, and I learnt from him that at the very time
when you were sowing the seed of God and the Fatherland in my heart, at
that very time, perhaps during those very days, you were infecting the
heart of that hapless creature, that maniac Kirillov, with poison... you
confirmed false malignant ideas in him, and brought him to the verge of
insanity.... Go, look at him now, he is your creation... you've seen him
though."

"In the first place, I must observe that Kirillov himself told me that
he is happy and that he's good. Your supposition that all this was going
on at the same time is almost correct. But what of it? I repeat, I was
not deceiving either of you."

"Are you an atheist? An atheist now?"

"Yes."

"And then?"

"Just as I was then."

"I wasn't asking you to treat me with respect when I began the
conversation. With your intellect you might have understood that,"
Shatov muttered indignantly.

"I didn't get up at your first word, I didn't close the conversation,
I didn't go away from you, but have been sitting here ever since
submissively answering your questions and... cries, so it seems I have
not been lacking in respect to you yet."

Shatov interrupted, waving his hand.

"Do you remember your expression that 'an atheist can't be a Russian,'
that 'an atheist at once ceases to be a Russian'? Do you remember saying
that?"

"Did I?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch questioned him back.

"You ask? You've forgotten? And yet that was one of the truest statements
of the leading peculiarity of the Russian soul, which you divined. You
