pounced on me with a sort of avidity, it is true, as soon as I went in,
and began listening to me, but with such a distracted air that at first
he evidently did not take in my words. But as soon as I pronounced the
name of Karmazinov he suddenly flew into a frenzy.

"Don't speak of him! Don't pronounce that name!" he exclaimed, almost in
a fury. "Here, look, read it! Read it!"

He opened the drawer and threw on the table three small sheets of paper,
covered with a hurried pencil scrawl, all from Varvara Petrovna. The
first letter was dated the day before yesterday, the second had come
yesterday, and the last that day, an hour before. Their contents were
quite trivial, and all referred to Karmazinov and betrayed the vain
and fussy uneasiness of Varvara Petrovna and her apprehension that
Karmazinov might forget to pay her a visit. Here is the first one dating
from two days before. (Probably there had been one also three days
before, and possibly another four days before as well.)

"If he deigns to visit you to-day, not a word about me, I beg. Not the
faintest hint. Don't speak of me, don't mention me.--V. S."

The letter of the day before:

"If he decides to pay you a visit this morning, I think the most
dignified thing would be not to receive him. That's what I think about
it; I don't know what you think.--V. S."

To-day's, the last:

"I feel sure that you're in a regular litter and clouds of tobacco
smoke. I'm sending you Marya and Fomushka. They'll tidy you up in half
an hour. And don't hinder them, but go and sit in the kitchen while they
clear up. I'm sending you a Bokhara rug and two china vases. I've long
been meaning to make you a present of them, and I'm sending you my
Teniers, too, for a time! You can put the vases in the window and hang
the Teniers on the right under the portrait of Goethe; it will be more
conspicuous there and it's always light there in the morning. If he does
turn up at last, receive him with the utmost courtesy but try and talk
of trifling matters, of some intellectual subject, and behave as though
you had seen each other lately. Not a word about me. Perhaps I may look
in on you in the evening.--V. S.

"P.S.--If he does not come to-day he won't come at all."

I read and was amazed that he was in such excitement over such trifles.
Looking at him inquiringly, I noticed that he had had time while I was
reading to change the everlasting white tie he always wore, for a red
one. His hat and stick lay on the table. He was pale, and his hands were
positively trembling.

"I don't care a hang about her anxieties," he cried frantically, in
response to my inquiring look. "_Je m'en fiche!_ She has the face to be
excited about Karmazinov, and she does not answer my letters. Here is
my unopened letter which she sent me back yesterday, here on the table
under the book, under _L'Homme qui rit_. What is it to me that she's
wearing herself out over Nikolay! _Je m'en fiche, et je proclame ma
liberté! Au diable le Karmazinov! Au diable la Lembke!_ I've hidden the
vases in the entry, and the Teniers in the chest of drawers, and I have
demanded that she is to see me at once. Do you hear. I've insisted!
I've sent her just such a scrap of paper, a pencil scrawl, unsealed, by
Nastasya, and I'm waiting. I want Darya Pavlovna to speak to me with
her own lips, before the face of Heaven, or at least before you. _Vous me
seconderez, n'est-ce pas, comme ami et témoin._ I don't want to have
to blush, to lie, I don't want secrets, I won't have secrets in this
matter. Let them confess everything to me openly, frankly, honourably
and then... then perhaps I may surprise the whole generation by my
magnanimity.... Am I a scoundrel or not, my dear sir?" he concluded
suddenly, looking menacingly at me, as though I'd considered him a
scoundrel.

I offered him a sip of water; I had never seen him like this before. All
the while he was talking he kept running from one end of the room to
the other, but he suddenly stood still before me in an extraordinary
attitude.

"Can you suppose," he began again with hysterical haughtiness, looking
me up and down, "can you imagine that I, Stepan Verhovensky, cannot find
in myself the moral strength to take my bag--my beggar's bag--and laying
it on my feeble shoulders to go out at the gate and vanish for ever,
when honour and the great principle of independence demand it! It's
not the first time that Stepan Verhovensky has had to repel despotism by
moral force, even though it be the despotism of a crazy woman, that
is, the most cruel and insulting despotism which can exist on earth,
although you have, I fancy, forgotten yourself so much as to laugh at
my phrase, my dear sir! Oh, you don't believe that I can find the moral
strength in myself to end my life as a tutor in a merchant's family, or
to die of hunger in a ditch! Answer me, answer at once; do you believe
it, or don't you believe it?"

But I was purposely silent. I even affected to hesitate to wound him by
answering in the negative, but to be unable to answer affirmatively. In
all this nervous excitement of his there was something which really did
offend me, and not personally, oh, no! But... I will explain later on.
He positively turned pale.

"Perhaps you are bored with me, G----v (this is my surname), and you
would like... not to come and see me at all?" he said in that tone of
pale composure which usually precedes some extraordinary outburst. I
jumped up in alarm. At that moment Nastasya came in, and, without a
word, handed Stepan Trofimovitch a piece of paper, on which something
was written in pencil. He glanced at it and flung it to me. On the
paper, in Varvara Petrovna's hand three words were written: "Stay at
home."

Stepan Trofimovitch snatched up his hat and stick in silence and went
quickly out of the room. Mechanically I followed him. Suddenly voices
and sounds of rapid footsteps were heard in the passage. He stood still,
as though thunder-struck.

"It's Liputin; I am lost!" he whispered, clutching at my arm.

At the same instant Liputin walked into the room.


IV

Why he should be lost owing to Liputin I did not know, and indeed I
did not attach much significance to the words; I put it all down to his
nerves. His terror, however, was remarkable, and I made up my mind to
keep a careful watch on him.

The very appearance of Liputin as he came in assured us that he had on
this occasion a special right to come in, in spite of the prohibition.
He brought with him an unknown gentleman, who must have been a new
arrival in the town. In reply to the senseless stare of my petrified
friend, he called out immediately in a loud voice:

"I'm bringing you a visitor, a special one! I make bold to intrude on
your solitude. Mr. Kirillov, a very distinguished civil engineer. And
what's more he knows your son, the much esteemed Pyotr Stepanovitch,
very intimately; and he has a message from him. He's only just arrived."

"The message is your own addition," the visitor observed curtly.
"There's no message at all. But I certainly do know Verhovensky. I left
him in the X. province, ten days ahead of us."

Stepan Trofimovitch mechanically offered his hand and motioned him to
sit down. He looked at me, he looked at Liputin, and then as though
suddenly recollecting himself sat down himself, though he still kept his
hat and stick in his hands without being aware of it.

"Bah, but you were going out yourself! I was told that you were quite
knocked up with work."

"Yes, I'm ill, and you see, I meant to go for a walk, I..." Stepan
Trofimovitch checked himself, quickly flung his hat and stick on the
sofa and--turned crimson.

Meantime, I was hurriedly examining the visitor. He was a young man,
about twenty-seven, decently dressed, well made, slender and dark, with
a pale, rather muddy-coloured face and black lustreless eyes. He seemed
rather thoughtful and absent-minded, spoke jerkily and ungrammatically,
transposing words in rather a strange way, and getting muddled if he
attempted a sentence of any length. Liputin was perfectly aware of
Stepan Trofimovitch's alarm, and was obviously pleased at it. He sat
down in a wicker chair which he dragged almost into the middle of the
room, so as to be at an equal distance between his host and the visitor,
who had installed themselves on sofas on opposite sides of the room. His
sharp eyes darted inquisitively from one corner of the room to another.

"It's.... a long while since I've seen Petrusha.... You met abroad?"
Stepan Trofimovitch managed to mutter to the visitor.

"Both here and abroad."

"Alexey Nilitch has only just returned himself after living four years
abroad," put in Liputin. "He has been travelling to perfect himself in
his speciality and has come to us because he has good reasons to expect
a job on the building of our railway bridge, and he's now waiting for an
answer about it. He knows the Drozdovs and Lizaveta Nikolaevna, through
Pyotr Stepanovitch."

The engineer sat, as it were, with a ruffled air, and listened with
awkward impatience. It seemed to me that he was angry about something.

"He knows Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch too."

"Do you know Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch?" inquired Stepan Trofimovitch.

"I know him too."

"It's... it's a very long time since I've seen Petrusha, and... I feel
I have so little right to call myself a father... _c'est le mot;_ I... how
did you leave him?"

"Oh, yes, I left him... he comes himself," replied Mr. Kirillov, in
haste to be rid of the question again. He certainly was angry.

"He's coming! At last I... you see, it's very long since I've see
Petrusha!" Stepan Trofimovitch could not get away from this phrase. "Now
I expect my poor boy to whom... to whom I have been so much to blame!
That is, I mean to say, when I left him in Petersburg, I... in short, I
looked on him as a nonentity, _quelque chose dans ce genre._ He was a very
nervous boy, you know, emotional, and... very timid. When he said his
prayers going to bed he used to bow down to the ground, and make the
sign of the cross on his pillow that he might not die in the night....
_Je m'en souviens. Enfin,_ no artistic feeling whatever, not a sign of
anything higher, of anything fundamental, no embryo of a future
ideal..._c'était comme un petit idiot,_ but I'm afraid I am incoherent;
excuse me... you came upon me..."

"You say seriously that he crossed his pillow?" the engineer asked
suddenly with marked curiosity.

"Yes, he used to..."

"All right. I just asked. Go on."

Stepan Trofimovitch looked interrogatively at Liputin.

"I'm very grateful to you for your visit. But I must confess I'm...
not in a condition... just now... But allow me to ask where you are
lodging."

"At Filipov's, in Bogoyavlensky Street."

"Ach, that's where Shatov lives," I observed involuntarily.

"Just so, in the very same house," cried Liputin, "only Shatov lodges
above, in the attic, while he's down below, at Captain Lebyadkin's. He
knows Shatov too, and he knows Shatov's wife. He was very intimate with
her, abroad."

"_Comment!_ Do you really know anything about that unhappy marriage _de ce
pauvre ami_ and that woman," cried Stepan Trofimovitch, carried away
by sudden feeling. "You are the first man I've met who has known her
personally; and if only..."

"What nonsense!" the engineer snapped out, flushing all over. "How you
add to things, Liputin! I've not seen Shatov's wife; I've only once seen
her in the distance and not at all close.... I know Shatov. Why do you
add things of all sorts?"

He turned round sharply on the sofa, clutched his hat, then laid it down
again, and settling himself down once more as before, fixed his angry
black eyes on Stepan Trofimovitch with a sort of defiance. I was at a
loss to understand such strange irritability.

"Excuse me," Stepan Trofimovitch observed impressively. "I understand
that it may be a very delicate subject...."

"No sort of delicate subject in it, and indeed it's shameful, and I
didn't shout at you that it's nonsense, but at Liputin, because he adds
things. Excuse me if you took it to yourself. I know Shatov, but I don't
know his wife at all... I don't know her at all!"

"I understand. I understand. And if I insisted, it's only because I'm
very fond of our poor friend, _notre irascible ami_, and have always
taken an interest in him.... In my opinion that man changed his former,
possibly over-youthful but yet sound ideas, too abruptly. And now he
says all sorts of things about _notre Sainte Russie_ to such a degree that
I've long explained this upheaval in his whole constitution, I can only
call it that, to some violent shock in his family life, and, in fact, to
his unsuccessful marriage. I, who know my poor Russia like the fingers
on my hand, and have devoted my whole life to the Russian people, I can
assure you that he does not know the Russian people, and what's more..."

"I don't know the Russian people at all, either, and I haven't time to
study them," the engineer snapped out again, and again he turned sharply
on the sofa. Stepan Trofimovitch was pulled up in the middle of his
speech.

"He is studying them, he is studying them," interposed Liputin. "He
has already begun the study of them, and is writing a very interesting
article dealing with the causes of the increase of suicide in Russia,
and, generally speaking, the causes that lead to the increase or
decrease of suicide in society. He has reached amazing results."

The engineer became dreadfully excited. "You have no right at all," he
muttered wrathfully. "I'm not writing an article. I'm not going to do
silly things. I asked you confidentially, quite by chance. There's
no article at all. I'm not publishing, and you haven't the right..."
Liputin was obviously enjoying himself.

"I beg your pardon, perhaps I made a mistake in calling your literary
work an article. He is only collecting observations, and the essence of
the question, or, so to say, its moral aspect he is not touching at all.
And, indeed, he rejects morality itself altogether, and holds with the
last new principle of general destruction for the sake of ultimate
good. He demands already more than a hundred million heads for the
establishment of common sense in Europe; many more than they demanded at
the last Peace Congress. Alexey Nilitch goes further than anyone in that
sense." The engineer listened with a pale and contemptuous smile. For
half a minute every one was silent.

"All this is stupid, Liputin," Mr. Kirillov observed at last, with a
certain dignity. "If I by chance had said some things to you, and you
caught them up again, as you like. But you have no right, for I never
speak to anyone. I scorn to talk.... If one has a conviction then it's
clear to me.... But you're doing foolishly. I don't argue about things
when everything's settled. I can't bear arguing. I never want to
argue...."

"And perhaps you are very wise," Stepan Trofimovitch could not resist
saying.

"I apologise to you, but I am not angry with anyone here," the visitor
went on, speaking hotly and rapidly. "I have seen few people for four
years. For four years I have talked little and have tried to see no one,
for my own objects which do not concern anyone else, for four years.
Liputin found this out and is laughing. I understand and don't mind. I'm
not ready to take offence, only annoyed at his liberty. And if I don't
explain my ideas to you," he concluded unexpectedly, scanning us all
with resolute eyes, "it's not at all that I'm afraid of your giving
information to the government; that's not so; please do not imagine
nonsense of that sort."

No one made any reply to these words. We only looked at each other. Even
Liputin forgot to snigger.

"Gentlemen, I'm very sorry"--Stepan Trofimovitch got up resolutely from
the sofa--"but I feel ill and upset. Excuse me."

"Ach, that's for us to go." Mr. Kirillov started, snatching up his cap.
"It's a good thing you told us. I'm so forgetful."

He rose, and with a good-natured air went up to Stepan Trofimovitch,
holding out his hand.

"I'm sorry you're not well, and I came."

"I wish you every success among us," answered Stepan Trofimovitch,
shaking hands with him heartily and without haste. "I understand that,
if as you say you have lived so long abroad, cutting yourself off
from people for objects of your own and forgetting Russia, you must
inevitably look with wonder on us who are Russians to the backbone, and
we must feel the same about you. _Mais cela passera._ I'm only puzzled at
one thing: you want to build our bridge and at the same time you declare
that you hold with the principle of universal destruction. They won't
let you build our bridge."

"What! What's that you said? Ach, I say!" Kirillov cried, much struck,
and he suddenly broke into the most frank and good-humoured laughter.
For a moment his face took a quite childlike expression, which I thought
suited him particularly. Liputin rubbed his hand with delight at Stepan
Trofimovitch's witty remark. I kept wondering to myself why Stepan
Trofimovitch was so frightened of Liputin, and why he had cried out "I
am lost" when he heard him coming.


V

We were all standing in the doorway. It was the moment when hosts and
guests hurriedly exchange the last and most cordial words, and then
part to their mutual gratification.

"The reason he's so cross to-day," Liputin dropped all at once, as it
were casually, when he was just going out of the room, "is because he
had a disturbance to-day with Captain Lebyadkin over his sister. Captain
Lebyadkin thrashes that precious sister of his, the mad girl, every day
with a whip, a real Cossack whip, every morning and evening. So Alexey
Nilitch has positively taken the lodge so as not to be present. Well,
good-bye."

"A sister? An invalid? With a whip?" Stepan Trofimovitch cried out, as
though he had suddenly been lashed with a whip himself. "What sister?
What Lebyadkin?" All his former terror came back in an instant.
"Lebyadkin! Oh, that's the retired captain; he used only to call himself
a lieutenant before...."

"Oh, what is his rank to me? What sister? Good heavens!... You say
Lebyadkin? But there used to be a Lebyadkin here...."

"That's the very man. 'Our' Lebyadkin, at Virginsky's, you remember?"

"But he was caught with forged papers?"

"Well, now he's come back. He's been here almost three weeks and under
the most peculiar circumstances."

"Why, but he's a scoundrel?"

"As though no one could be a scoundrel among us," Liputin grinned
suddenly, his knavish little eyes seeming to peer into Stepan
Trofimovitch's soul.

"Good heavens! I didn't mean that at all... though I quite agree with
you about that, with you particularly. But what then, what then? What
did you mean by that? You certainly meant something by that."

"Why, it's all so trivial.... This captain to all appearances went away
from us at that time; not because of the forged papers, but simply to
look for his sister, who was in hiding from him somewhere, it seems;
well, and now he's brought her and that's the whole story. Why do you
seem frightened, Stepan Trofimovitch? I only tell this from his drunken
chatter though, he doesn't speak of it himself when he's sober. He's an
irritable man, and, so to speak, æsthetic in a military style; only he
has bad taste. And this sister is lame as well as mad. She seems to
have been seduced by some one, and Mr. Lebyadkin has, it seems, for many
years received a yearly grant from the seducer by way of compensation
for the wound to his honour, so it would seem at least from his chatter,
though I believe it's only drunken talk. It's simply his brag. Besides,
that sort of thing is done much cheaper. But that he has a sum of money
is perfectly certain. Ten days ago he was walking barefoot, and now I've
seen hundreds in his hands. His sister has fits of some sort every day,
she shrieks and he 'keeps her in order' with the whip. You must inspire
a woman with respect, he says. What I can't understand is how Shatov
goes on living above him. Alexey Nilitch has only been three days with
them. They were acquainted in Petersburg, and now he's taken the lodge
to get away from the disturbance."

"Is this all true?" said Stepan Trofimovitch, addressing the engineer.

"You do gossip a lot, Liputin," the latter muttered wrathfully.

"Mysteries, secrets! Where have all these mysteries and secrets among us
sprung from?" Stepan Trofimovitch could not refrain from exclaiming.

The engineer frowned, flushed red, shrugged his shoulders and went out
of the room.

"Alexey Nilitch positively snatched the whip out of his hand, broke it
and threw it out of the window, and they had a violent quarrel," added
Liputin.

"Why are you chattering, Liputin; it's stupid. What for?" Alexey Nilitch
turned again instantly.

"Why be so modest and conceal the generous impulses of one's soul; that
is, of your soul? I'm not speaking of my own."

"How stupid it is... and quite unnecessary. Lebyadkin's stupid and quite
worthless--and no use to the cause, and... utterly mischievous. Why do
you keep babbling all sorts of things? I'm going."

"Oh, what a pity!" cried Liputin with a candid smile, "or I'd have
amused you with another little story, Stepan Trofimovitch. I came,
indeed, on purpose to tell you, though I dare say you've heard it
already. Well, till another time, Alexey Nilitch is in such a hurry.
Good-bye for the present. The story concerns Varvara Petrovna. She
amused me the day before yesterday; she sent for me on purpose. It's
simply killing. Good-bye."

But at this Stepan Trofimovitch absolutely would not let him go. He
seized him by the shoulders, turned him sharply back into the room, and
sat him down in a chair. Liputin was positively scared.

"Why, to be sure," he began, looking warily at Stepan Trofimovitch from
his chair, "she suddenly sent for me and asked me 'confidentially' my
private opinion, whether Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch is mad or in his right
mind. Isn't that astonishing?"

"You're out of your mind!" muttered Stepan Trofimovitch, and suddenly,
as though he were beside himself: "Liputin, you know perfectly well that
you only came here to tell me something insulting of that sort and...
something worse!"

In a flash, I recalled his conjecture that Liputin knew not only more
than we did about our affair, but something else which we should never
know.

"Upon my word, Stepan Trofimovitch," muttered Liputin, seeming greatly
alarmed, "upon my word..."

"Hold your tongue and begin! I beg you, Mr. Kirillov, to come back too,
and be present. I earnestly beg you! Sit down, and you, Liputin, begin
directly, simply and without any excuses."

"If I had only known it would upset you so much I wouldn't have begun at
all. And of course I thought you knew all about it from Varvara Petrovna
herself."

"You didn't think that at all. Begin, begin, I tell you."

"Only do me the favour to sit down yourself, or how can I sit here
when you are running about before me in such excitement. I can't speak
coherently."

Stepan Trofimovitch restrained himself and sank impressively into an
easy chair. The engineer stared gloomily at the floor. Liputin looked at
them with intense enjoyment,

"How am I to begin?... I'm too overwhelmed...."


VI

The day before yesterday a servant was suddenly sent to me: 'You are
asked to call at twelve o'clock,' said he. Can you fancy such a thing? I
threw aside my work, and precisely at midday yesterday I was ringing at
the bell. I was let into the drawing room; I waited a minute--she came
in; she made me sit down and sat down herself, opposite. I sat down, and
I couldn't believe it; you know how she has always treated me. She
began at once without beating about the bush, you know her way. 'You
remember,' she said, 'that four years ago when Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
was ill he did some strange things which made all the town wonder
till the position was explained. One of those actions concerned you
personally. When Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch recovered he went at my request
to call on you. I know that he talked to you several times before, too.
Tell me openly and candidly what you... (she faltered a little at this
point) what you thought of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch then... what was your
view of him altogether... what idea you were able to form of him at that
time... and still have?'

"Here she was completely confused, so that she paused for a whole
minute, and suddenly flushed. I was alarmed. She began again--touchingly
is not quite the word, it's not applicable to her--but in a very
impressive tone:

"'I want you,' she said, 'to understand me clearly and without mistake.
I've sent for you now because I look upon you as a keen-sighted and
quick-witted man, qualified to make accurate observations.' (What
compliments!) 'You'll understand too,' she said, 'that I am a mother
appealing to you.... Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has suffered some
calamities and has passed through many changes of fortune in his life.
All that,' she said, 'might well have affected the state of his mind.
I'm not speaking of madness, of course,' she said, 'that's quite out
of the question!' (This was uttered proudly and resolutely.) 'But there
might be something strange, something peculiar, some turn of thought, a
tendency to some particular way of looking at things.' (Those were her
exact words, and I admired, Stepan Trofimovitch, the exactness with
which Varvara Petrovna can put things. She's a lady of superior
intellect!) 'I have noticed in him, anyway,' she said, 'a perpetual
restlessness and a tendency to peculiar impulses. But I am a mother
and you are an impartial spectator, and therefore qualified with your
intelligence to form a more impartial opinion. I implore you, in fact'
(yes, that word, 'implore' was uttered!), 'to tell me the whole truth,
without mincing matters. And if you will give me your word never to
forget that I have spoken to you in confidence, you may reckon upon my
always being ready to seize every opportunity in the future to show my
gratitude.' Well, what do you say to that?"

"You have... so amazed me..." faltered Stepan Trofimovitch, "that I
don't believe you."

"Yes, observe, observe," cried Liputin, as though he had not heard
Stepan Trofimovitch, "observe what must be her agitation and uneasiness
if she stoops from her grandeur to appeal to a man like me, and even
condescends to beg me to keep it secret. What do you call that?
Hasn't she received some news of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, something
unexpected?"

"I don't know... of news of any sort... I haven't seen her for some
days, but... but I must say..." lisped Stepan Trofimovitch, evidently
hardly able to think clearly, "but I must say, Liputin, that if it
was said to you in confidence, and here you're telling it before every
one..."

"Absolutely in confidence! But God strike me dead if I... But as for
telling it here... what does it matter? Are we strangers, even Alexey
Nilitch?"

"I don't share that attitude. No doubt we three here will keep the
secret, but I'm afraid of the fourth, you, and wouldn't trust you in
anything...."

"What do you mean by that? Why it's more to my interest than anyone's,
seeing I was promised eternal gratitude! What I wanted was to point
out in this connection one extremely strange incident, rather to
say, psychological than simply strange. Yesterday evening, under the
influence of my conversation with Varvara Petrovna--you can fancy
yourself what an impression it made on me--I approached Alexey Nilitch
with a discreet question: 'You knew Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch abroad,'
said I, 'and used to know him before in Petersburg too. What do you
think of his mind and his abilities?' said I. He answered laconically,
as his way is, that he was a man of subtle intellect and sound judgment.
'And have you never noticed in the course of years,' said I, 'any
turn of ideas or peculiar way of looking at things, or any, so to say,
insanity?' In fact, I repeated Varvara Petrovna's own question. And
would you believe it, Alexey Nilitch suddenly grew thoughtful, and
scowled, just as he's doing now. 'Yes,' said he, 'I have sometimes
thought there was something strange.' Take note, too, that if anything
could have seemed strange even to Alexey Nilitch, it must really have
been something, mustn't it?"

"Is that true?" said Stepan Trofimovitch, turning to Alexey Nilitch.

"I should prefer not to speak of it," answered Alexey Nilitch, suddenly
raising his head, and looking at him with flashing eyes. "I wish to
contest your right to do this, Liputin. You've no right to drag me into
this. I did not give my whole opinion at all. Though I knew Nikolay
Stavrogin in Petersburg that was long ago, and though I've met him since
I know him very little. I beg you to leave me out and... All this is
something like scandal."

Liputin threw up his hands with an air of oppressed innocence.

"A scandal-monger! Why not say a spy while you're about it? It's all
very well for you, Alexey Nilitch, to criticise when you stand aloof
from everything. But you wouldn't believe it, Stepan Trofimovitch--take
Captain Lebyadkin, he is stupid enough, one may say... in fact, one's
ashamed to say how stupid he is; there is a Russian comparison, to
signify the degree of it; and do you know he considers himself injured
by Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, though he is full of admiration for his wit.
'I'm amazed,' said he, 'at that man. He's a subtle serpent.' His own
words. And I said to him (still under the influence of my conversation,
and after I had spoken to Alexey Nilitch), 'What do you think, captain,
is your subtle serpent mad or not?' Would you believe it, it was just as
if I'd given him a sudden lash from behind. He simply leapt up from his
seat. 'Yes,' said he, '... yes, only that,' he said, 'cannot affect...'
'Affect what?' He didn't finish. Yes, and then he fell to thinking so
bitterly, thinking so much, that his drunkenness dropped off him. We
were sitting in Filipov's restaurant. And it wasn't till half an hour
later that he suddenly struck the table with his fist. 'Yes,' said he,
'maybe he's mad, but that can't affect it....' Again he didn't say what
it couldn't affect. Of course I'm only giving you an extract of the
conversation, but one can understand the sense of it. You may ask whom
you like, they all have the same idea in their heads, though it never
entered anyone's head before. 'Yes,' they say, 'he's mad; he's very
clever, but perhaps he's mad too.'"

Stepan Trofimovitch sat pondering, and thought intently.

"And how does Lebyadkin know?"

"Do you mind inquiring about that of Alexey Nilitch, who has just called
me a spy? I'm a spy, yet I don't know, but Alexey Nilitch knows all the
ins and outs of it, and holds his tongue."

"I know nothing about it, or hardly anything," answered the engineer
with the same irritation. "You make Lebyadkin drank to find out. You
brought me here to find out and to make me say. And so you must be a
spy."

"I haven't made him drunk yet, and he's not worth the money either, with
all his secrets. They are not worth that to me. I don't know what they
are to you. On the contrary, he is scattering the money, though twelve
days ago he begged fifteen kopecks of me, and it's he treats me to
champagne, not I him. But you've given me an idea, and if there should
be occasion I will make him drunk, just to get to the bottom of it and
maybe I shall find out... all your little secrets," Liputin snapped back
spitefully.

Stepan Trofimovitch looked in bewilderment at the two disputants. Both
were giving themselves away, and what's more, were not standing on
ceremony. The thought crossed my mind that Liputin had brought this
Alexey Nilitch to us with the simple object of drawing him into a
conversation through a third person for purposes of his own--his
favourite manoeuvre.

"Alexey Nilitch knows Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch quite well," he went on,
irritably, "only he conceals it. And as to your question about Captain
Lebyadkin, he made his acquaintance before any of us did, six years ago
in Petersburg, in that obscure, if one may so express it, epoch in the
life of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, before he had dreamed of rejoicing our
hearts by coming here. Our prince, one must conclude, surrounded himself
with rather a queer selection of acquaintances. It was at that time, it
seems, that he made acquaintance with this gentleman here."

"Take care, Liputin. I warn you, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch meant to be
here soon himself, and he knows how to defend himself."

"Why warn me? I am the first to cry out that he is a man of the most
subtle and refined intelligence, and I quite reassured Varvara Petrovna
yesterday on that score. 'It's his character,' I said to her, 'that I
can't answer for.' Lebyadkin said the same thing yesterday: 'A lot of
harm has come to me from his character,' he said. Stepan Trofimovitch,
it's all very well for you to cry out about slander and spying, and at
the very time observe that you wring it all out of me, and with such
immense curiosity too. Now, Varvara Petrovna went straight to the point
yesterday. 'You have had a personal interest in the business,' she said,
'that's why I appeal to you.' I should say so! What need to look for
motives when I've swallowed a personal insult from his excellency before
the whole society of the place. I should think I have grounds to be
interested, not merely for the sake of gossip. He shakes hands with
you one day, and next day, for no earthly reason, he returns your
hospitality by slapping you on the cheeks in the face of all decent
society, if the fancy takes him, out of sheer wantonness. And what's
more, the fair sex is everything for them, these butterflies and
mettlesome cocks! Grand gentlemen with little wings like the ancient
cupids, lady-killing Petchorins! It's all very well for you, Stepan
Trofimovitch, a confirmed bachelor, to talk like that, stick up for his
excellency and call me a slanderer. But if you married a pretty young
wife--as you're still such a fine fellow--then I dare say you'd bolt
your door against our prince, and throw up barricades in your house!
Why, if only that Mademoiselle Lebyadkin, who is thrashed with a whip,
were not mad and bandy-legged, by Jove, I should fancy she was the
victim of the passions of our general, and that it was from him that
Captain Lebyadkin had suffered 'in his family dignity,' as he expresses
it himself. Only perhaps that is inconsistent with his refined taste,
though, indeed, even that's no hindrance to him. Every berry is worth
picking if only he's in the mood for it. You talk of slander, but I'm
not crying this aloud though the whole town is ringing with it; I only
listen and assent. That's not prohibited."

"The town's ringing with it? What's the town ringing with?"

"That is, Captain Lebyadkin is shouting for all the town to hear, and
isn't that just the same as the market-place ringing with it? How am I
to blame? I interest myself in it only among friends, for, after all,
I consider myself among friends here." He looked at us with an innocent
air. "Something's happened, only consider: they say his excellency has
sent three hundred roubles from Switzerland by a most honourable young
lady, and, so to say, modest orphan, whom I have the honour of knowing,
to be handed over to Captain Lebyadkin. And Lebyadkin, a little later,
was told as an absolute fact also by a very honourable and therefore
trustworthy person, I won't say whom, that not three hundred but a
thousand roubles had been sent!... And so, Lebyadkin keeps crying out
'the young lady has grabbed seven hundred roubles belonging to me,' and
he's almost ready to call in the police; he threatens to, anyway, and
he's making an uproar all over the town."

"This is vile, vile of you!" cried the engineer, leaping up suddenly
from his chair.

"But I say, you are yourself the honourable person who brought word
to Lebyadkin from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch that a thousand roubles were
sent, not three hundred. Why, the captain told me so himself when he was
drunk."

"It's... it's an unhappy misunderstanding. Some one's made a mistake and
it's led to... It's nonsense, and it's base of you."

"But I'm ready to believe that it's nonsense, and I'm distressed at the
story, for, take it as you will, a girl of an honourable reputation
is implicated first over the seven hundred roubles, and secondly in
unmistakable intimacy with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. For how much does it
mean to his excellency to disgrace a girl of good character, or put to
shame another man's wife, like that incident with me? If he comes across
a generous-hearted man he'll force him to cover the sins of others under
the shelter of his honourable name. That's just what I had to put up
with, I'm speaking of myself...."

"Be careful, Liputin." Stepan Trofimovitch got up from his easy chair
and turned pale.

"Don't believe it, don't believe it! Somebody has made a mistake
and Lebyadkin's drunk..." exclaimed the engineer in indescribable
excitement. "It will all be explained, but I can't.... And I think it's
low.... And that's enough, enough!"

He ran out of the room.

"What are you about? Why, I'm going with you!" cried Liputin, startled.
He jumped up and ran after Alexey Nilitch.


VII

Stepan Trofimovitch stood a moment reflecting, looked at me as though he
did not see me, took up his hat and stick and walked quietly out of
the room. I followed him again, as before. As we went out of the gate,
noticing that I was accompanying him, he said:

"Oh yes, you may serve as a witness..._de l'accident. Vous
m'accompagnerez, n'est-ce pas?_"

"Stepan Trofimovitch, surely you're not going there again? Think what
may come of it!"

With a pitiful and distracted smile, a smile of shame and utter despair,
and at the same time of a sort of strange ecstasy, he whispered to me,
standing still for an instant:

"I can't marry to cover 'another man's sins'!"

These words were just what I was expecting. At last that fatal sentence
that he had kept hidden from me was uttered aloud, after a whole week of
shuffling and pretence. I was positively enraged.

"And you, Stepan Verhovensky, with your luminous mind, your kind heart,
can harbour such a dirty, such a low idea... and could before Liputin
came!"

He looked at me, made no answer and walked on in the same direction.
I did not want to be left behind. I wanted to give Varvara Petrovna my
version. I could have forgiven him if he had simply with his womanish
faint-heartedness believed Liputin, but now it was clear that he
had thought of it all himself long before, and that Liputin had only
confirmed his suspicions and poured oil on the flames. He had not
hesitated to suspect the girl from the very first day, before he had any
kind of grounds, even Liputin's words, to go upon. Varvara Petrovna's
despotic behaviour he had explained to himself as due to her haste
to cover up the aristocratic misdoings of her precious "Nicolas" by
marrying the girl to an honourable man! I longed for him to be punished
for it.

"_Oh, Dieu, qui est si grand et si bon!_ Oh, who will comfort me!" he
exclaimed, halting suddenly again, after walking a hundred paces.

"Come straight home and I'll make everything clear to you," I cried,
turning him by force towards home.

"It's he! Stepan Trofimovitch, it's you? You?" A fresh, joyous young
voice rang out like music behind us.

We had seen nothing, but a lady on horseback suddenly made her
appearance beside us--Lizaveta Nikolaevna with her invariable companion.
She pulled up her horse.

"Come here, come here quickly!" she called to us, loudly and merrily.
"It's twelve years since I've seen him, and I know him, while he.... Do
you really not know me?"

Stepan Trofimovitch clasped the hand held out to him and kissed it
reverently. He gazed at her as though he were praying and could not
utter a word.

"He knows me, and is glad! Mavriky Nikolaevitch, he's delighted to see
me! Why is it you haven't been to see us all this fortnight? Auntie
tried to persuade me you were ill and must not be disturbed; but I know
Auntie tells lies. I kept stamping and swearing at you, but I had made
up my mind, quite made up my mind, that you should come to me first,
that was why I didn't send to you. Heavens, why he hasn't changed a
bit!" She scrutinised him, bending down from the saddle. "He's absurdly
unchanged. Oh, yes, he has wrinkles, a lot of wrinkles, round his eyes
and on his cheeks some grey hair, but his eyes are just the same. And
have I changed? Have I changed? Why don't you say something?"

I remembered at that moment the story that she had been almost ill when
she was taken away to Petersburg at eleven years old, and that she had
cried during her illness and asked for Stepan Trofimovitch.

"You... I..." he faltered now in a voice breaking with joy. "I was just
crying out 'who will comfort me?' and I heard your voice. I look on it
as a miracle _et je commence à croire_."

"_En Dieu! En Dieu qui est là-haut et qui est si grand et si bon!_ You
see, I know all your lectures by heart. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, what faith
he used to preach to me then, _en Dieu qui est si grand et si bon!_ And do
you remember your story of how Columbus discovered America, and they
all cried out, 'Land! land!'? My nurse Alyona Frolovna says I was
light-headed at night afterwards, and kept crying out 'land! land!'
in my sleep. And do you remember how you told me the story of Prince
Hamlet? And do you remember how you described to me how the poor
emigrants were transported from Europe to America? And it was all
untrue; I found out afterwards how they were transited. But what
beautiful fibs he used to tell me then, Mavriky Nikolaevitch! They were
better than the truth. Why do you look at Mavriky Nikolaevitch like
that? He is the best and finest man on the face of the globe and you must
like him just you do me! _Il fait tout ce que je veux._ But, dear Stepan
Trofimovitch, you must be unhappy again, since you cry out in the middle
of the street asking who will comfort you. Unhappy, aren't you? Aren't
you?"

"Now I'm happy...."

"Aunt is horrid to you?" she went on, without listening. "She's just the
same as ever, cross, unjust, and always our precious aunt! And do
you remember how you threw yourself into my arms in the garden and I
comforted you and cried--don't be afraid of Mavriky Nikolaevitch; he has
known all about you, everything, for ever so long; you can weep on his
shoulder as long as you like, and he'll stand there as long as you like!
... Lift up your hat, take it off altogether for a minute, lift up your
head, stand on tiptoe, I want to kiss you on the forehead as I kissed
you for the last time when we parted. Do you see that young lady's
admiring us out of the window? Come closer, closer! Heavens! How grey he
is!"

And bending over in the saddle she kissed him on the forehead.

"Come, now to your home! I know where you live. I'll be with you
directly, in a minute. I'll make you the first visit, you stubborn man,
and then I must have you for a whole day at home. You can go and make
ready for me."

And she galloped off with her cavalier. We returned. Stepan Trofimovitch
sat down on the sofa and began to cry.

_"Dieu, Dieu."_ he exclaimed, _"enfin une minute de bonheur!"_

Not more than ten minutes afterwards she reappeared according to her
promise, escorted by her Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

_"Vous et le bonheur, vous arrivez en même temps!"_ He got up to meet her.

"Here's a nosegay for you; I rode just now to Madame Chevalier's, she
has flowers all the winter for name-days. Here's Mavriky Nikolaevitch,
please make friends. I wanted to bring you a cake instead of a nosegay,
but Mavriky Nikolaevitch declares that is not in the Russian spirit."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was an artillery captain, a tall and handsome man
of thirty-three, irreproachably correct in appearance, with an imposing
and at first sight almost stern countenance, in spite of his wonderful
and delicate kindness which no one could fail to perceive almost the
first moment of making his acquaintance. He was taciturn, however,
seemed very self-possessed and made no efforts to gain friends. Many
of us said later that he was by no means clever; but this was not
altogether just.

I won't attempt to describe the beauty of Lizaveta Nikolaevna. The
whole town was talking of it, though some of our ladies and young girls
indignantly differed on the subject. There were some among them who
already detested her, and principally for her pride. The Drozdovs had
scarcely begun to pay calls, which mortified them, though the real
reason for the delay was Praskovya Ivanovna's invalid state. They
detested her in the second place because she was a relative of
the governor's wife, and thirdly because she rode out every day on
horseback. We had never had young ladies who rode on horseback before;
it was only natural that the appearance of Lizaveta Nikolaevna on
horseback and her neglect to pay calls was bound to offend local
society. Yet every one knew that riding was prescribed her by the
doctor's orders, and they talked sarcastically of her illness. She
really was ill. What struck me at first sight in her was her abnormal,
nervous, incessant restlessness. Alas, the poor girl was very unhappy,
and everything was explained later. To-day, recalling the past, I should
not say she was such a beauty as she seemed to me then. Perhaps she was
really not pretty at all. Tall, slim, but strong and supple, she struck
one by the irregularities of the lines of her face. Her eyes were set
somewhat like a Kalmuck's, slanting; she was pale and thin in the
face with high cheek-bones, but there was something in the face that
conquered and fascinated! There was something powerful in the ardent
glance of her dark eyes. She always made her appearance "like a
conquering heroine, and to spread her conquests." She seemed proud and
at times even arrogant. I don't know whether she succeeded in being
kind, but I know that she wanted to, and made terrible efforts to force
herself to be a little kind. There were, no doubt, many fine impulses
and the very best elements in her character, but everything in her
seemed perpetually seeking its balance and unable to find it; everything
was in chaos, in agitation, in uneasiness. Perhaps the demands she made
upon herself were too severe, and she was never able to find in herself
the strength to satisfy them.

She sat on the sofa and looked round the room.

"Why do I always begin to feel sad at such moments; explain that
mystery, you learned person? I've been thinking all my life that
I should be goodness knows how pleased at seeing you and recalling
everything, and here I somehow don't feel pleased at all, although I do
love you.... Ach, heavens! He has my portrait on the wall! Give it here.
I remember it! I remember it!"

An exquisite miniature in water-colour of Liza at twelve years old had
been sent nine years before to Stepan Trofimovitch from Petersburg by
the Drozdovs. He had kept it hanging on his wall ever since.

"Was I such a pretty child? Can that really have been my face?"

She stood up, and with the portrait in her hand looked in the
looking-glass.

"Make haste, take it!" she cried, giving back the portrait. "Don't hang
it up now, afterwards. I don't want to look at it."

She sat down on the sofa again. "One life is over and another is begun,
then that one is over--a third begins, and so on, endlessly. All the
ends are snipped off as it were with scissors. See what stale things I'm
telling you. Yet how much truth there is in them!"

She looked at me, smiling; she had glanced at me several times already,
but in his excitement Stepan Trofimovitch forgot that he had promised
to introduce me.

"And why have you hung my portrait under those daggers? And why have you
got so many daggers and sabres?"

He had as a fact hanging on the wall, I don't know why, two crossed
daggers and above them a genuine Circassian sabre. As she asked this
question she looked so directly at me that I wanted to answer, but
hesitated to speak. Stepan Trofimovitch grasped the position at last and
introduced me.

"I know, I know," she said, "I'm delighted to meet you. Mother has
heard a great deal about you, too. Let me introduce you to Mavriky
Nikolaevitch too, he's a splendid person. I had formed a funny notion of
you already. You're Stepan Trofimovitch's confidant, aren't you?"

I turned rather red.

"Ach, forgive me, please. I used quite the wrong word: not funny at all,
but only..." She was confused and blushed. "Why be ashamed though at
your being a splendid person? Well, it's time we were going, Mavriky
Nikolaevitch! Stepan Trofimovitch, you must be with us in half an hour.
Mercy, what a lot we shall talk! Now I'm your confidante, and about
everything, _everything,_ you understand?"

Stepan Trofimovitch was alarmed at once.

"Oh, Mavriky Nikolaevitch knows everything, don't mind him!"

"What does he know?"

"Why, what do you mean?" she cried in astonishment. "Bah, why it's true
then that they're hiding it! I wouldn't believe it! And they're hiding
Dasha, too. Aunt wouldn't let me go in to see Dasha to-day. She says
she's got a headache."

"But... but how did you find out?"

"My goodness, like every one else. That needs no cunning!"

"But does every one else...?"

"Why, of course. Mother, it's true, heard it first through Alyona
Frolovna, my nurse; your Nastasya ran round to tell her. You told
Nastasya, didn't you? She says you told her yourself."

"I... I did once speak," Stepan Trofimovitch faltered, crimsoning all
over, "but... I only hinted... _j'étais si nerveux et malade, et
puis_..."

She laughed.

"And your confidant didn't happen to be at hand, and Nastasya turned up.
Well that was enough! And the whole town's full of her cronies! Come, it
doesn't matter, let them know; it's all the better. Make haste and come
to us, we dine early.... Oh, I forgot," she added, sitting down again;
"listen, what sort of person is Shatov?"

"Shatov? He's the brother of Darya Pavlovna."

"I know he's her brother! What a person you are, really," she
interrupted impatiently. "I want to know what he's like; what sort of
man he is."

_"C'est un pense-creux d'ici. C'est le meilleur et le plus irascible
homme du monde."_

"I've heard that he's rather queer. But that wasn't what I meant. I've
heard that he knows three languages, one of them English, and can do
