for her, Aglaya would probably be very angry with her, and that she was
pretty sure to be sitting reading on the green bench that she had talked
of two or three days since, and about which she had nearly quarrelled
with Prince S., who did not see anything particularly lovely in it.

Arrived at the rendezvous of the prince and her daughter, and hearing
the strange words of the latter, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
dreadfully alarmed, for many reasons. However, now that she had dragged
the prince home with her, she began to feel a little frightened at what
she had undertaken. Why should not Aglaya meet the prince in the
park and have a talk with him, even if such a meeting should be by
appointment?

"Don't suppose, prince," she began, bracing herself up for the effort,
"don't suppose that I have brought you here to ask questions. After last
night, I assure you, I am not so exceedingly anxious to see you at all;
I could have postponed the pleasure for a long while." She paused.

"But at the same time you would be very glad to know how I happened to
meet Aglaya Ivanovna this morning?" The prince finished her speech for
her with the utmost composure.

"Well, what then? Supposing I should like to know?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, blushing. "I'm sure I am not afraid of plain speaking. I'm
not offending anyone, and I never wish to, and--"

"Pardon me, it is no offence to wish to know this; you are her
mother. We met at the green bench this morning, punctually at seven
o'clock,--according to an agreement made by Aglaya Ivanovna with myself
yesterday. She said that she wished to see me and speak to me about
something important. We met and conversed for an hour about matters
concerning Aglaya Ivanovna herself, and that's all."

"Of course it is all, my friend. I don't doubt you for a moment," said
Lizabetha Prokofievna with dignity.

"Well done, prince, capital!" cried Aglaya, who entered the room at
this moment. "Thank you for assuming that I would not demean myself
with lies. Come, is that enough, mamma, or do you intend to put any more
questions?"

"You know I have never needed to blush before you, up to this day,
though perhaps you would have been glad enough to make me," said
Lizabetha Prokofievna,--with majesty. "Good-bye, prince; forgive me for
bothering you. I trust you will rest assured of my unalterable esteem
for you."

The prince made his bows and retired at once. Alexandra and Adelaida
smiled and whispered to each other, while Lizabetha Prokofievna glared
severely at them. "We are only laughing at the prince's beautiful bows,
mamma," said Adelaida. "Sometimes he bows just like a meal-sack, but
to-day he was like--like Evgenie Pavlovitch!"

"It is the _heart_ which is the best teacher of refinement and dignity,
not the dancing-master," said her mother, sententiously, and departed
upstairs to her own room, not so much as glancing at Aglaya.

When the prince reached home, about nine o'clock, he found Vera Lebedeff
and the maid on the verandah. They were both busy trying to tidy up the
place after last night's disorderly party.

"Thank goodness, we've just managed to finish it before you came in!"
said Vera, joyfully.

"Good-morning! My head whirls so; I didn't sleep all night. I should
like to have a nap now."

"Here, on the verandah? Very well, I'll tell them all not to come and
wake you. Papa has gone out somewhere."

The servant left the room. Vera was about to follow her, but returned
and approached the prince with a preoccupied air.

"Prince!" she said, "have pity on that poor boy; don't turn him out
today."

"Not for the world; he shall do just as he likes."

"He won't do any harm now; and--and don't be too severe with him."

"Oh dear no! Why--"

"And--and you won't _laugh_ at him? That's the chief thing."

"Oh no! Never."

"How foolish I am to speak of such things to a man like you," said Vera,
blushing. "Though you _do_ look tired," she added, half turning away,
"your eyes are so splendid at this moment--so full of happiness."

"Really?" asked the prince, gleefully, and he laughed in delight.

But Vera, simple-minded little girl that she was (just like a boy, in
fact), here became dreadfully confused, of a sudden, and ran hastily out
of the room, laughing and blushing.

"What a dear little thing she is," thought the prince, and immediately
forgot all about her.

He walked to the far end of the verandah, where the sofa stood, with
a table in front of it. Here he sat down and covered his face with his
hands, and so remained for ten minutes. Suddenly he put his hand in his
coat-pocket and hurriedly produced three letters.

But the door opened again, and out came Colia.

The prince actually felt glad that he had been interrupted,--and might
return the letters to his pocket. He was glad of the respite.

"Well," said Colia, plunging in medias res, as he always did, "here's
a go! What do you think of Hippolyte now? Don't respect him any longer,
eh?"

"Why not? But look here, Colia, I'm tired; besides, the subject is too
melancholy to begin upon again. How is he, though?"

"Asleep--he'll sleep for a couple of hours yet. I quite
understand--you haven't slept--you walked about the park, I know.
Agitation--excitement--all that sort of thing--quite natural, too!"

"How do you know I walked in the park and didn't sleep at home?"

"Vera just told me. She tried to persuade me not to come, but I couldn't
help myself, just for one minute. I have been having my turn at the
bedside for the last two hours; Kostia Lebedeff is there now. Burdovsky
has gone. Now, lie down, prince, make yourself comfortable, and sleep
well! I'm awfully impressed, you know."

"Naturally, all this--"

"No, no, I mean with the 'explanation,' especially that part of it where
he talks about Providence and a future life. There is a gigantic thought
there."

The prince gazed affectionately at Colia, who, of course, had come in
solely for the purpose of talking about this "gigantic thought."

"But it is not any one particular thought, only; it is the general
circumstances of the case. If Voltaire had written this now, or
Rousseau, I should have just read it and thought it remarkable, but
should not have been so _impressed_ by it. But a man who knows for
certain that he has but ten minutes to live and can talk like
that--why--it's--it's _pride_, that is! It is really a most extraordinary,
exalted assertion of personal dignity, it's--it's _defiant!_ What a
_gigantic_ strength of will, eh? And to accuse a fellow like that of not
putting in the cap on purpose; it's base and mean! You know he deceived
us last night, the cunning rascal. I never packed his bag for him, and
I never saw his pistol. He packed it himself. But he put me off my guard
like that, you see. Vera says you are going to let him stay on; I swear
there's no danger, especially as we are always with him."

"Who was by him at night?"

"I, and Burdovsky, and Kostia Lebedeff. Keller stayed a little while,
and then went over to Lebedeff's to sleep. Ferdishenko slept at
Lebedeff's, too; but he went away at seven o'clock. My father is always
at Lebedeff's; but he has gone out just now. I dare say Lebedeff will be
coming in here directly; he has been looking for you; I don't know what
he wants. Shall we let him in or not, if you are asleep? I'm going to
have a nap, too. By-the-by, such a curious thing happened. Burdovsky
woke me at seven, and I met my father just outside the room, so drunk,
he didn't even know me. He stood before me like a log, and when he
recovered himself, asked hurriedly how Hippolyte was. 'Yes,' he said,
when I told him, 'that's all very well, but I _really_ came to warn you
that you must be very careful what you say before Ferdishenko.' Do you
follow me, prince?"

"Yes. Is it really so? However, it's all the same to us, of course."

"Of course it is; we are not a secret society; and that being the case,
it is all the more curious that the general should have been on his way
to wake me up in order to tell me this."

"Ferdishenko has gone, you say?"

"Yes, he went at seven o'clock. He came into the room on his way out; I
was watching just then. He said he was going to spend 'the rest of the
night' at Wilkin's; there's a tipsy fellow, a friend of his, of that
name. Well, I'm off. Oh, here's Lebedeff himself! The prince wants to go
to sleep, Lukian Timofeyovitch, so you may just go away again."

"One moment, my dear prince, just one. I must absolutely speak to you
about something which is most grave," said Lebedeff, mysteriously and
solemnly, entering the room with a bow and looking extremely important.
He had but just returned, and carried his hat in his hand. He looked
preoccupied and most unusually dignified.

The prince begged him to take a chair.

"I hear you have called twice; I suppose you are still worried about
yesterday's affair."

"What, about that boy, you mean? Oh dear no, yesterday my ideas were
a little--well--mixed. Today, I assure you, I shall not oppose in the
slightest degree any suggestions it may please you to make."

"What's up with you this morning, Lebedeff? You look so important and
dignified, and you choose your words so carefully," said the prince,
smiling.

"Nicolai Ardalionovitch!" said Lebedeff, in a most amiable tone of
voice, addressing the boy. "As I have a communication to make to the
prince which concerns only myself--"

"Of course, of course, not my affair. All right," said Colia, and away
he went.

"I love that boy for his perception," said Lebedeff, looking after
him. "My dear prince," he continued, "I have had a terrible misfortune,
either last night or early this morning. I cannot tell the exact time."

"What is it?"

"I have lost four hundred roubles out of my side pocket! They're gone!"
said Lebedeff, with a sour smile.

"You've lost four hundred roubles? Oh! I'm sorry for that."

"Yes, it is serious for a poor man who lives by his toil."

"Of course, of course! How was it?"

"Oh, the wine is to blame, of course. I confess to you, prince, as I
would to Providence itself. Yesterday I received four hundred roubles
from a debtor at about five in the afternoon, and came down here by
train. I had my purse in my pocket. When I changed, I put the money
into the pocket of my plain clothes, intending to keep it by me, as I
expected to have an applicant for it in the evening."

"It's true then, Lebedeff, that you advertise to lend money on gold or
silver articles?"

"Yes, through an agent. My own name doesn't appear. I have a large
family, you see, and at a small percentage--"

"Quite so, quite so. I only asked for information--excuse the question.
Go on."

"Well, meanwhile that sick boy was brought here, and those guests came
in, and we had tea, and--well, we made merry--to my ruin! Hearing of
your birthday afterwards, and excited with the circumstances of the
evening, I ran upstairs and changed my plain clothes once more for my
uniform [Civil Service clerks in Russia wear uniform.]--you must have
noticed I had my uniform on all the evening? Well, I forgot the money in
the pocket of my old coat--you know when God will ruin a man he first
of all bereaves him of his senses--and it was only this morning at
half-past seven that I woke up and grabbed at my coat pocket, first
thing. The pocket was empty--the purse gone, and not a trace to be
found!"

"Dear me! This is very unpleasant!"

"Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate
expression," said Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.

"But what's to be done? It's a serious matter," said the prince,
thoughtfully. "Don't you think you may have dropped it out of your
pocket whilst intoxicated?"

"Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly
express it, prince. But consider--if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an
object out of my pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on
the ground. Where is the object, then?"

"Didn't you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?"

"I've looked everywhere, and turned out everything."

"I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up,
then."

"Or taken it out of my pocket--two alternatives."

"It is very distressing, because _who_--? That's the question!"

"Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it--that is the very
question. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few
words!"

"Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It's a serious--"

"Sarcasm!" cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands. "All right, all right,
I'm not angry. I'm only put out about this. Whom do you suspect?"

"That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the
servant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect
any of my children."

"I should think not. Go on."

"Then it must be one of the guests."

"Is such a thing possible?"

"Absolutely and utterly impossible--and yet, so it must be. But one
thing I am sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the
evening when we were all together, but either at night or early in the
morning; therefore, by one of those who slept here. Burdovsky and Colia
I except, of course. They did not even come into my room."

"Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?"

"Four of us, including myself, in two rooms. The general, myself,
Keller, and Ferdishenko. One of us four it must have been. I don't
suspect myself, though such cases have been known."

"Oh! _do_ go on, Lebedeff! Don't drag it out so."

"Well, there are three left, then--Keller firstly. He is a drunkard
to begin with, and a liberal (in the sense of other people's pockets),
otherwise with more of the ancient knight about him than of the modern
liberal. He was with the sick man at first, but came over afterwards
because there was no place to lie down in the room and the floor was so
hard."

"You suspect him?"

"I _did_ suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my hair
in despair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was
sleeping the sleep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the
sudden disappearance of Ferdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we
decided to search Keller, who was lying there sleeping like a top. Well,
we searched his clothes thoroughly, and not a farthing did we find; in
fact, his pockets all had holes in them. We found a dirty handkerchief,
and a love-letter from some scullery-maid. The general decided that he
was innocent. We awoke him for further inquiries, and had the greatest
difficulty in making him understand what was up. He opened his mouth and
stared--he looked so stupid and so absurdly innocent. It wasn't Keller."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said the prince, joyfully. "I was so afraid."

"Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the
culprit?" said Lebedeff, frowning.

"Oh no--not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid! Don't
repeat it please, Lebedeff, don't tell anyone I said that!"

"My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart--it is
their tomb!" said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region of
his heart.

"Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it's Ferdishenko; that is, I mean,
you suspect Ferdishenko?"

"Whom else?" said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince s
face.

"Of course--quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?"

"We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at
seven o'clock, or even earlier."

"I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to--I forget the
name, some friend of his, to finish the night."

"H'm! then Colia has spoken to you already?"

"Not about the theft."

"He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko
went off to Wilkin's. That is not so curious in itself, but here the
evidence opens out further. He left his address, you see, when he went.
Now prince, consider, why did he leave his address? Why do you suppose
he went out of his way to tell Colia that he had gone to Wilkin's? Who
cared to know that he was going to Wilkin's? No, no! prince, this is
finesse, thieves' finesse! This is as good as saying, 'There, how can I
be a thief when I leave my address? I'm not concealing my movements as a
thief would.' Do you understand, prince?"

"Oh yes, but that is not enough."

"Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given
is a sham. An hour after--that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin's
myself, and there was no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me,
certainly, that an hour or so since someone had been hammering at the
door, and had smashed the bell; she said she would not open the door
because she didn't want to wake her master; probably she was too lazy to
get up herself. Such phenomena are met with occasionally!"

"But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!"

"Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!" said Lebedeff
with almost servile amiability, smiling at the prince. There was a look
of cunning in his eyes, however.

"You should search your room and all the cupboards again," said the
prince, after a moment or two of silent reflection.

"But I have done so, my dear prince!" said Lebedeff, more sweetly than
ever.

"H'm! why must you needs go up and change your coat like that?" asked
the prince, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.

"Oh, don't be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am not
worth it! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf
of the criminal too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!"

"Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think
about," said the prince, irritably, "but what are you going to do, since
you are so sure it was Ferdishenko?"

"But who else _could_ it be, my very dear prince?" repeated Lebedeff, as
sweet as sugar again. "If you don't wish me to suspect Mr. Burdovsky?"

"Of course not."

"Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Nonsense!" said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.

"Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the
general! We went off on the hot scent to Wilkin's together, you know;
but I must first observe that the general was even more thunderstruck
than I myself this morning, when I awoke him after discovering the
theft; so much so that his very face changed--he grew red and then pale,
and at length flew into a paroxysm of such noble wrath that I assure you
I was quite surprised! He is a most generous-hearted man! He tells lies
by the thousands, I know, but it is merely a weakness; he is a man of
the highest feelings; a simple-minded man too, and a man who carries the
conviction of innocence in his very appearance. I love that man, sir; I
may have told you so before; it is a weakness of mine. Well--he suddenly
stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat and bared his
breast. 'Search me,' he says, 'you searched Keller; why don't you search
me too? It is only fair!' says he." And all the while his legs and hands
were trembling with anger, and he as white as a sheet all over! So I
said to him, "Nonsense, general; if anybody but yourself had said that
to me, I'd have taken my head, my own head, and put it on a large dish
and carried it round to anyone who suspected you; and I should have
said: 'There, you see that head? It's my head, and I'll go bail with
that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire for him, too. There,'
says I, 'that's how I'd answer for you, general!' Then he embraced me,
in the middle of the street, and hugged me so tight (crying over me all
the while) that I coughed fit to choke! 'You are the one friend left to
me amid all my misfortunes,' says he. Oh, he's a man of sentiment, that!
He went on to tell me a story of how he had been accused, or suspected,
of stealing five hundred thousand roubles once, as a young man; and how,
the very next day, he had rushed into a burning, blazing house and saved
the very count who suspected him, and Nina Alexandrovna (who was then
a young girl), from a fiery death. The count embraced him, and that was
how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As for the money, it
was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box with a secret
lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been for the
fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an
absolute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept!
She's a grand woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with
me!"

"Are you acquainted with her?"

"Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying
myself in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as
she thinks, encouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I
not only do not encourage him, but I actually keep him out of harm's
way, and out of bad company. Besides, he's my friend, prince, so that
I shall not lose sight of him, again. Where he goes, I go. He's quite
given up visiting the captain's widow, though sometimes he thinks sadly
of her, especially in the morning, when he's putting on his boots. I
don't know why it's at that time. But he has no money, and it's no
use his going to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you,
prince?"

"No, he has not."

"Ah, he's ashamed to! He _meant_ to ask you, I know, for he said so. I
suppose he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you
would probably refuse if he asked you again."

"Do you ever give him money?"

"Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my
very life, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that's exaggeration; not life,
we'll say, but some illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that
sort, I would stand with pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a
great man fallen--money, indeed!"

"H'm, then you _do_ give him money?"

"N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never
give him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate
ways. He is going to town with me now; for you must know I am off to
Petersburg after Ferdishenko, while the scent is hot; I'm certain he is
there. I shall let the general go one way, while I go the other; we have
so arranged matters in order to pop out upon Ferdishenko, you see, from
different sides. But I am going to follow that naughty old general and
catch him, I know where, at a certain widow's house; for I think it will
be a good lesson, to put him to shame by catching him with the widow."

"Oh, Lebedeff, don't, don't make any scandal about it!" said the prince,
much agitated, and speaking in a low voice.

"Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed
of himself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I
cannot help thinking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you,
esteemed prince; I confess that it is the chief object of my visit. You
know the Ivolgins, you have even lived in their house; so if you would
lend me your help, honoured prince, in the general's own interest and
for his good."

Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.

"What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most
anxious to understand you, Lebedeff."

"I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage
it with the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely
watched in his own house. Unfortunately I am not on terms...
otherwise... but Nicolai Ardalionovitch, who adores you with all his
youthful soul, might help, too."

"No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this
business! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood
you, Lebedeff?"

Lebedeff made an impatient movement.

"But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that
is all--that is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to
consider him an invalid?"

"Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part."

"I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You
know the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is
crazy about that captain's widow, and he cannot go to her without
money, and I mean to catch him at her house today--for his own good; but
supposing it was not only the widow, but that he had committed a real
crime, or at least some very dishonourable action (of which he is, of
course, incapable), I repeat that even in that case, if he were treated
with what I may call generous tenderness, one could get at the whole
truth, for he is very soft-hearted! Believe me, he would betray himself
before five days were out; he would burst into tears, and make a clean
breast of the matter; especially if managed with tact, and if you and
his family watched his every step, so to speak. Oh, my dear prince,"
Lebedeff added most emphatically, "I do not positively assert that he
has... I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my last drop of blood for
him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery, drunkenness, and
the captain's widow, all these together may lead him very far."

"I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a
case," said the prince, rising; "but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am
terribly perplexed. Tell me, do you still think... plainly, you say
yourself that you suspect Mr. Ferdishenko?"

Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.

"Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken
prince?" he replied, with an unctuous smile.

Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.

"You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing. This
Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who
knows? Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more
likely man than... than any other."

Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was
saying. The latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up
and down, trying not to look at Lebedeff.

"You see," he said, "I was given to understand that Ferdishenko was that
sort of man,--that one can't say everything before him. One has to take
care not to say too much, you understand? I say this to prove that he
really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this than anyone else,
eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a mistake."

"And who told you this about Ferdishenko?"

"Oh, I was told. Of course I don't altogether believe it. I am very
sorry that I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don't
believe it myself; it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to
say anything about it."

"You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you
got this report from," said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his
seat, and was trying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up
and down. "Because look here, prince, I don't mind telling you now that
as we were going along to Wilkin's this morning, after telling me what
you know about the fire, and saving the count and all that, the general
was pleased to drop certain hints to the same effect about Ferdishenko,
but so vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to put a few questions
to him on the matter, with the result that I found the whole thing was
an invention of his excellency's own mind. Of course, he only lies with
the best intentions; still, he lies. But, such being the case, where
could you have heard the same report? It was the inspiration of the
moment with him, you understand, so who could have told _you?_ It is an
important question, you see!"

"It was Colia told me, and his father told _him_ at about six this
morning. They met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for
something or other." The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made
known to himself, in detail.

"There now, that's what we may call _scent!_" said Lebedeff, rubbing his
hands and laughing silently. "I thought it must be so, you see. The
general interrupted his innocent slumbers, at six o'clock, in order
to go and wake his beloved son, and warn him of the dreadful danger of
companionship with Ferdishenko. Dear me! what a dreadfully dangerous man
Ferdishenko must be, and what touching paternal solicitude, on the part
of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!"

"Listen, Lebedeff," began the prince, quite overwhelmed; "_do_ act
quietly--don't make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask you--I entreat you! No
one must know--_no one_, mind! In that case only, I will help you."

"Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes--be assured that
the whole matter shall be buried within my heart!" cried Lebedeff, in a
paroxysm of exaltation. "I'd give every drop of my blood... Illustrious
prince, I am a poor wretch in soul and spirit, but ask the veriest
scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal with one like himself, or with
a noble-hearted man like you, and there is no doubt as to his choice!
He'll answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man--and there you
have the triumph of virtue! _Au revoir_, honoured prince! You and I
together--softly! softly!"

X.

The prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time
he thought of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off
reading them until the evening.

When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without
having had the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he
again dreamed a painful dream, and once more that poor, "sinful" woman
appeared to him. Again she gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long
lashes, and beckoned him after her; and again he awoke, as before, with
the picture of her face haunting him.

He longed to get up and go to her at once--but he _could not_. At length,
almost in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.

These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange,
impossible dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we
remember them and wonder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps,
that you were in full possession of your reason during this succession
of fantastic images; even that you acted with extraordinary logic and
cunning while surrounded by murderers who hid their intentions and made
great demonstrations of friendship, while waiting for an opportunity
to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped them by some ingenious
stratagem; then you doubted if they were really deceived, or whether
they were only pretending not to know your hiding-place; then you
thought of another plan and hoodwinked them once again. You remember all
this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly accepted all
the manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your
dream? One of the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your
very eyes; then the woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little
dwarf; and you believed it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of
course--while at the same time your intelligence seemed unusually keen,
and accomplished miracles of cunning, sagacity, and logic! Why is it
that when you awake to the world of realities you nearly always feel,
sometimes very vividly, that the vanished dream has carried with it some
enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile at the extravagance
of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of absurdity contained
some real idea, something that belongs to your true life,--something
that exists, and has always existed, in your heart. You search your
dream for some prophecy that you were expecting. It has left a deep
impression upon you, joyful or cruel, but what it means, or what has
been predicted to you in it, you can neither understand nor remember.

The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince.
He felt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of
their existence was like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up
her mind to write to her? he asked himself. How could she write about
that at all? And how could such a wild idea have entered her head?
And yet, the strangest part of the matter was, that while he read the
letters, he himself almost believed in the possibility, and even in the
justification, of the idea he had thought so wild. Of course it was a
mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something cruelly real about
it. For hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several passages
returned again and again to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he
felt inclined to say to himself that he had foreseen and known all that
was written here; it even seemed to him that he had read the whole of
this some time or other, long, long ago; and all that had tormented and
grieved him up to now was to be found in these old, long since read,
letters.

"When you open this letter" (so the first began), "look first at the
signature. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain
nothing, nor attempt to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing
with you, you might be offended at my audacity; but who am I, and who
are you? We are at such extremes, and I am so far removed from you, that
I could not offend you if I wished to do so."

Farther on, in another place, she wrote: "Do not consider my words
as the sickly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my
opinion--perfection! I have seen you--I see you every day. I do not
judge you; I have not weighed you in the scales of Reason and found you
Perfection--it is simply an article of faith. But I must confess one sin
against you--I love you. One should not love perfection. One should
only look on it as perfection--yet I am in love with you. Though love
equalizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in
my most secret thoughts. I have written 'Do not fear,' as if you could
fear. I would kiss your footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting
myself on a level with you!--Look at the signature--quick, look at the
signature!"

"However, observe" (she wrote in another of the letters), "that although
I couple you with him, yet I have not once asked you whether you love
him. He fell in love with you, though he saw you but once. He spoke of
you as of 'the light.' These are his own words--I heard him use them.
But I understood without his saying it that you were all that light is
to him. I lived near him for a whole month, and I understood then that
you, too, must love him. I think of you and him as one."

"What was the matter yesterday?" (she wrote on another sheet). "I passed
by you, and you seemed to me to _blush_. Perhaps it was only my fancy.
If I were to bring you to the most loathsome den, and show you the
revelation of undisguised vice--you should not blush. You can never feel
the sense of personal affront. You may hate all who are mean, or base,
or unworthy--but not for yourself--only for those whom they wrong. No
one can wrong _you_. Do you know, I think you ought to love me--for you
are the same in my eyes as in his-you are as light. An angel cannot
hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I often ask myself--is it possible to
love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in nature. Abstract love
of humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are different. You
cannot help loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above
all personal offence or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to
know that you felt anger or shame on my account, for that would be your
fall--you would become comparable at once with such as me.

"Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.

"Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel
stories. I should do differently. I should represent Christ alone--the
disciples did leave Him alone occasionally. I should paint one little
child left with Him. This child has been playing about near Him, and
had probably just been telling the Saviour something in its pretty
baby prattle. Christ had listened to it, but was now musing--one
hand reposing on the child's bright head. His eyes have a far-away
expression. Thought, great as the Universe, is in them--His face is sad.
The little one leans its elbow upon Christ's knee, and with its cheek
resting on its hand, gazes up at Him, pondering as children sometimes do
ponder. The sun is setting. There you have my picture.

"You are innocent--and in your innocence lies all your perfection--oh,
remember that! What is my passion to you?--you are mine now; I shall be
near you all my life--I shall not live long!"

At length, in the last letter of all, he found:

"For Heaven's sake, don't misunderstand me! Do not think that I
humiliate myself by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class
of people who take a satisfaction in humiliating themselves--from pride.
I have my consolation, though it would be difficult to explain it--but I
do not humiliate myself.

"Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own
sake, naturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved;
I have thought so for a long time. I know that once when your sister
Adelaida saw my portrait she said that such beauty could overthrow
the world. But I have renounced the world. You think it strange that
I should say so, for you saw me decked with lace and diamonds, in the
company of drunkards and wastrels. Take no notice of that; I know that
I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it is dwelling within me
now--it is not myself. I can see it every day in two dreadful eyes which
are always looking at me, even when not present. These eyes are silent
now, they say nothing; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy, and
there is a secret in it. I am convinced that in some box he has a razor
hidden, tied round with silk, just like the one that Moscow murderer
had. This man also lived with his mother, and had a razor hidden away,
tied round with white silk, and with this razor he intended to cut a
throat.

"All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath
the floor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in
oil-cloth, perhaps buried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the
Moscow case. I could have shown you the very spot!

"He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he
must hate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have
arranged with him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from
very fright, but he will kill me first. He has just burst out laughing,
and says that I am raving. He knows I am writing to you."

There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters--one of
them was very long.

At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had
wandered about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to
him to be lighter than ever. "It must be quite early," he thought. (He
had forgotten his watch.) There was a sound of distant music somewhere.
"Ah," he thought, "the Vauxhall! They won't be there today, of course!"
At this moment he noticed that he was close to their house; he had felt
that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, and, with a beating
heart, he mounted the verandah steps.

No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened
the door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty. He stood in the
middle of the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, and in came
Alexandra, candle in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him in
surprise, looking at him questioningly.

It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door
to door, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.

"How did you come here?" she asked, at last.

"I--I--came in--"

"Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and
I am just going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S.
have gone to town."

"I have come to you--now--to--"

"Do you know what time it is?"

"N--no!"

"Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one."

"I--I thought it was half-past nine!"

"Never mind!" she laughed, "but why didn't you come earlier? Perhaps you
were expected!"

"I thought" he stammered, making for the door.

"_Au revoir!_ I shall amuse them all with this story tomorrow!"

He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating,
his thoughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a
dream.

And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the
same vision, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The
woman appeared to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front
of him, as though she had been waiting for him there.

He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.

No, this was no apparition!

There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since
their parting.

She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached
with anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting
with her, and he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of
mind.

She went on her knees before him--there in the open road--like a
madwoman. He retreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed
it, and, just as in his dream, the tears were sparkling on her long,
beautiful lashes.

"Get up!" he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. "Get up at
once!"

"Are you happy--are you happy?" she asked. "Say this one word. Are you
happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What did she
say?"

She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put
her questions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.

"I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me--I won't write--so that this
is the last time I shall see you, the last time! This is really the _last
time!_"

"Oh, be calm--be calm! Get up!" he entreated, in despair.

She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.

"Good-bye!" she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.

The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and
had taken her arm and was leading her away.

"Wait a minute, prince," shouted the latter, as he went. "I shall be
back in five minutes."

He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for
him.

"I've put her in the carriage," he said; "it has been waiting round the
corner there since ten o'clock. She expected that you would be with _them_
all the evening. I told her exactly what you wrote me. She won't write
to the girl any more, she promises; and tomorrow she will be off, as you
wish. She desired to see you for the last time, although you refused,
so we've been sitting and waiting on that bench till you should pass on
your way home."

"Did she bring you with her of her own accord?"

"Of course she did!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth; "and I saw for
myself what I knew before. You've read her letters, I suppose?"

"Did you read them?" asked the prince, struck by the thought.

"Of course--she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the
razor, eh? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Oh, she is mad!" cried the prince, wringing his hands. "Who knows?
Perhaps she is not so mad after all," said Rogojin, softly, as though
thinking aloud.

The prince made no reply.

"Well, good-bye," said Rogojin. "I'm off tomorrow too, you know.
Remember me kindly! By-the-by," he added, turning round sharply again,
"did you answer her question just now? Are you happy, or not?"

"No, no, no!" cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.

"Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say 'yes,'" cried Rogojin, laughing
sardonically.

And he disappeared, without looking round again.




PART IV

I.

A week had elapsed since the rendezvous of our two friends on the
green bench in the park, when, one fine morning at about half-past ten
o'clock, Varvara Ardalionovna, otherwise Mrs. Ptitsin, who had been
out to visit a friend, returned home in a state of considerable mental
depression.

There are certain people of whom it is difficult to say anything which
will at once throw them into relief--in other words, describe them
graphically in their typical characteristics. These are they who are
generally known as "commonplace people," and this class comprises, of
course, the immense majority of mankind. Authors, as a rule, attempt to
select and portray types rarely met with in their entirety, but these
types are nevertheless more real than real life itself.

"Podkoleosin" [A character in Gogol's comedy, The Wedding.] was perhaps
an exaggeration, but he was by no means a non-existent character; on the
contrary, how many intelligent people, after hearing of this Podkoleosin
from Gogol, immediately began to find that scores of their friends were
exactly like him! They knew, perhaps, before Gogol told them, that their
friends were like Podkoleosin, but they did not know what name to give
them. In real life, young fellows seldom jump out of the window just
before their weddings, because such a feat, not to speak of its other
aspects, must be a decidedly unpleasant mode of escape; and yet there
are plenty of bridegrooms, intelligent fellows too, who would be ready
to confess themselves Podkoleosins in the depths of their consciousness,
just before marriage. Nor does every husband feel bound to repeat
at every step, "_Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!_" like another typical
personage; and yet how many millions and billions of Georges Dandins
there are in real life who feel inclined to utter this soul-drawn cry
after their honeymoon, if not the day after the wedding! Therefore,
without entering into any more serious examination of the question, I
will content myself with remarking that in real life typical characters
are "watered down," so to speak; and all these Dandins and Podkoleosins
actually exist among us every day, but in a diluted form. I will just
add, however, that Georges Dandin might have existed exactly as Molière
presented him, and probably does exist now and then, though rarely; and
so I will end this scientific examination, which is beginning to
look like a newspaper criticism. But for all this, the question
remains,--what are the novelists to do with commonplace people, and how
are they to be presented to the reader in such a form as to be in
the least degree interesting? They cannot be left out altogether, for
commonplace people meet one at every turn of life, and to leave them out
would be to destroy the whole reality and probability of the story. To
fill a novel with typical characters only, or with merely strange and
uncommon people, would render the book unreal and improbable, and
would very likely destroy the interest. In my opinion, the duty of the
novelist is to seek out points of interest and instruction even in the
characters of commonplace people.

For instance, when the whole essence of an ordinary person's nature lies
in his perpetual and unchangeable commonplaceness; and when in spite of
all his endeavours to do something out of the common, this person ends,
eventually, by remaining in his unbroken line of routine--. I think
such an individual really does become a type of his own--a type of
commonplaceness which will not for the world, if it can help it,
be contented, but strains and yearns to be something original and
independent, without the slightest possibility of being so. To
this class of commonplace people belong several characters in this
novel;--characters which--I admit--I have not drawn very vividly up to
now for my reader's benefit.

Such were, for instance, Varvara Ardalionovna Ptitsin, her husband, and
her brother, Gania.

There is nothing so annoying as to be fairly rich, of a fairly good
family, pleasing presence, average education, to be "not stupid,"
kind-hearted, and yet to have no talent at all, no originality, not a
single idea of one's own--to be, in fact, "just like everyone else."

Of such people there are countless numbers in this world--far more even
than appear. They can be divided into two classes as all men can--that
is, those of limited intellect, and those who are much cleverer. The
former of these classes is the happier.

To a commonplace man of limited intellect, for instance, nothing is
simpler than to imagine himself an original character, and to revel in
that belief without the slightest misgiving.

Many of our young women have thought fit to cut their hair short, put on
blue spectacles, and call themselves Nihilists. By doing this they have
been able to persuade themselves, without further trouble, that they
have acquired new convictions of their own. Some men have but felt some
little qualm of kindness towards their fellow-men, and the fact has
