hundred gulden for yourself."

"I thank you humbly, Madame, but I am ashamed to--"

"Come, come!" cried the Grandmother so energetically, and with such an
air of menace, that I did not dare refuse the money further.

"If, when in Moscow, you have no place where you can lay your head,"
she added, "come and see me, and I will give you a recommendation. Now,
Potapitch, get things ready."

I ascended to my room, and lay down upon the bed. A whole hour I must
have lain thus, with my head resting upon my hand. So the crisis had
come! I needed time for its consideration. To-morrow I would have a
talk with Polina. Ah! The Frenchman! So, it was true? But how could it
be so? Polina and De Griers! What a combination!

No, it was too improbable. Suddenly I leapt up with the idea of seeking
Astley and forcing him to speak. There could be no doubt that he knew
more than I did. Astley? Well, he was another problem for me to solve.

Suddenly there came a knock at the door, and I opened it to find
Potapitch awaiting me.

"Sir," he said, "my mistress is asking for you."

"Indeed? But she is just departing, is she not? The train leaves in ten
minutes' time."

"She is uneasy, sir; she cannot rest. Come quickly, sir; do not delay."

I ran downstairs at once. The Grandmother was just being carried out of
her rooms into the corridor. In her hands she held a roll of bank-notes.

"Alexis Ivanovitch," she cried, "walk on ahead, and we will set out
again."

"But whither, Madame?"

"I cannot rest until I have retrieved my losses. March on ahead, and
ask me no questions. Play continues until midnight, does it not?"

For a moment I stood stupefied--stood deep in thought; but it was not
long before I had made up my mind.

"With your leave, Madame," I said, "I will not go with you."

"And why not? What do you mean? Is every one here a stupid
good-for-nothing?"

"Pardon me, but I have nothing to reproach myself with. I merely will
not go. I merely intend neither to witness nor to join in your play. I
also beg to return you your five hundred gulden. Farewell."

Laying the money upon a little table which the Grandmother's chair
happened to be passing, I bowed and withdrew.

"What folly!" the Grandmother shouted after me. "Very well, then. Do
not come, and I will find my way alone. Potapitch, you must come with
me. Lift up the chair, and carry me along."

I failed to find Mr. Astley, and returned home. It was now growing
late--it was past midnight, but I subsequently learnt from Potapitch
how the Grandmother's day had ended. She had lost all the money which,
earlier in the day, I had got for her paper securities--a sum amounting
to about ten thousand roubles. This she did under the direction of the
Pole whom, that afternoon, she had dowered with two ten-gulden pieces.
But before his arrival on the scene, she had commanded Potapitch to
stake for her; until at length she had told him also to go about his
business. Upon that the Pole had leapt into the breach. Not only did it
happen that he knew the Russian language, but also he could speak a
mixture of three different dialects, so that the pair were able to
understand one another. Yet the old lady never ceased to abuse him,
despite his deferential manner, and to compare him unfavourably with
myself (so, at all events, Potapitch declared). "You," the old
chamberlain said to me, "treated her as a gentleman should, but he--he
robbed her right and left, as I could see with my own eyes. Twice she
caught him at it, and rated him soundly. On one occasion she even
pulled his hair, so that the bystanders burst out laughing. Yet she
lost everything, sir--that is to say, she lost all that you had changed
for her. Then we brought her home, and, after asking for some water and
saying her prayers, she went to bed. So worn out was she that she fell
asleep at once. May God send her dreams of angels! And this is all that
foreign travel has done for us! Oh, my own Moscow! For what have we not
at home there, in Moscow? Such a garden and flowers as you could never
see here, and fresh air and apple-trees coming into blossom,--and a
beautiful view to look upon. Ah, but what must she do but go travelling
abroad? Alack, alack!"



XIII

Almost a month has passed since I last touched these notes--notes which
I began under the influence of impressions at once poignant and
disordered. The crisis which I then felt to be approaching has now
arrived, but in a form a hundred times more extensive and unexpected
than I had looked for. To me it all seems strange, uncouth, and tragic.
Certain occurrences have befallen me which border upon the marvellous.
At all events, that is how I view them. I view them so in one regard at
least. I refer to the whirlpool of events in which, at the time, I was
revolving. But the most curious feature of all is my relation to those
events, for hitherto I had never clearly understood myself. Yet now the
actual crisis has passed away like a dream. Even my passion for Polina
is dead. Was it ever so strong and genuine as I thought? If so, what
has become of it now? At times I fancy that I must be mad; that
somewhere I am sitting in a madhouse; that these events have merely
SEEMED to happen; that still they merely SEEM to be happening.

I have been arranging and re-perusing my notes (perhaps for the purpose
of convincing myself that I am not in a madhouse). At present I am
lonely and alone. Autumn is coming--already it is mellowing the leaves;
and, as I sit brooding in this melancholy little town (and how
melancholy the little towns of Germany can be!), I find myself taking
no thought for the future, but living under the influence of passing
moods, and of my recollections of the tempest which recently drew me
into its vortex, and then cast me out again. At times I seem still to
be caught within that vortex. At times, the tempest seems once more to
be gathering, and, as it passes overhead, to be wrapping me in its
folds, until I have lost my sense of order and reality, and continue
whirling and whirling and whirling around.

Yet, it may be that I shall be able to stop myself from revolving if
once I can succeed in rendering myself an exact account of what has
happened within the month just past. Somehow I feel drawn towards the
pen; on many and many an evening I have had nothing else in the world
to do. But, curiously enough, of late I have taken to amusing myself
with the works of M. Paul de Kock, which I read in German translations
obtained from a wretched local library. These works I cannot abide, yet
I read them, and find myself marvelling that I should be doing so.
Somehow I seem to be afraid of any SERIOUS book--afraid of permitting
any SERIOUS preoccupation to break the spell of the passing moment. So
dear to me is the formless dream of which I have spoken, so dear to me
are the impressions which it has left behind it, that I fear to touch
the vision with anything new, lest it should dissolve in smoke. But is
it so dear to me? Yes, it IS dear to me, and will ever be fresh in my
recollections--even forty years hence....

So let me write of it, but only partially, and in a more abridged form
than my full impressions might warrant.

First of all, let me conclude the history of the Grandmother. Next day
she lost every gulden that she possessed. Things were bound to happen
so, for persons of her type who have once entered upon that road
descend it with ever-increasing rapidity, even as a sledge descends a
toboggan-slide. All day until eight o'clock that evening did she play;
and, though I personally did not witness her exploits, I learnt of them
later through report.

All that day Potapitch remained in attendance upon her; but the Poles
who directed her play she changed more than once. As a beginning she
dismissed her Pole of the previous day--the Pole whose hair she had
pulled--and took to herself another one; but the latter proved worse
even than the former, and incurred dismissal in favour of the first
Pole, who, during the time of his unemployment, had nevertheless
hovered around the Grandmother's chair, and from time to time obtruded
his head over her shoulder. At length the old lady became desperate,
for the second Pole, when dismissed, imitated his predecessor by
declining to go away; with the result that one Pole remained standing
on the right of the victim, and the other on her left; from which
vantage points the pair quarrelled, abused each other concerning the
stakes and rounds, and exchanged the epithet "laidak" [Rascal] and
other Polish terms of endearment. Finally, they effected a mutual
reconciliation, and, tossing the money about anyhow, played simply at
random. Once more quarrelling, each of them staked money on his own
side of the Grandmother's chair (for instance, the one Pole staked upon
the red, and the other one upon the black), until they had so confused
and browbeaten the old lady that, nearly weeping, she was forced to
appeal to the head croupier for protection, and to have the two Poles
expelled. No time was lost in this being done, despite the rascals'
cries and protestations that the old lady was in their debt, that she
had cheated them, and that her general behaviour had been mean and
dishonourable. The same evening the unfortunate Potapitch related the
story to me with tears complaining that the two men had filled their
pockets with money (he himself had seen them do it) which had been
shamelessly pilfered from his mistress. For instance, one Pole demanded
of the Grandmother fifty gulden for his trouble, and then staked the
money by the side of her stake. She happened to win; whereupon he cried
out that the winning stake was his, and hers the loser. As soon as the
two Poles had been expelled, Potapitch left the room, and reported to
the authorities that the men's pockets were full of gold; and, on the
Grandmother also requesting the head croupier to look into the affair,
the police made their appearance, and, despite the protests of the
Poles (who, indeed, had been caught redhanded), their pockets were
turned inside out, and the contents handed over to the Grandmother. In
fact, in, view of the circumstance that she lost all day, the croupiers
and other authorities of the Casino showed her every attention; and on
her fame spreading through the town, visitors of every
nationality--even the most knowing of them, the most
distinguished--crowded to get a glimpse of "la vieille comtesse russe,
tombee en enfance," who had lost "so many millions."

Yet with the money which the authorities restored to her from the
pockets of the Poles the Grandmother effected very, very little, for
there soon arrived to take his countrymen's place, a third Pole--a man
who could speak Russian fluently, was dressed like a gentleman (albeit
in lacqueyish fashion), and sported a huge moustache. Though polite
enough to the old lady, he took a high hand with the bystanders. In
short, he offered himself less as a servant than as an ENTERTAINER.
After each round he would turn to the old lady, and swear terrible
oaths to the effect that he was a "Polish gentleman of honour" who
would scorn to take a kopeck of her money; and, though he repeated
these oaths so often that at length she grew alarmed, he had her play
in hand, and began to win on her behalf; wherefore, she felt that she
could not well get rid of him. An hour later the two Poles who, earlier
in the day, had been expelled from the Casino, made a reappearance
behind the old lady's chair, and renewed their offers of service--even
if it were only to be sent on messages; but from Potapitch I
subsequently had it that between these rascals and the said "gentleman
of honour" there passed a wink, as well as that the latter put
something into their hands. Next, since the Grandmother had not yet
lunched--she had scarcely for a moment left her chair--one of the two
Poles ran to the restaurant of the Casino, and brought her thence a cup
of soup, and afterwards some tea. In fact, BOTH the Poles hastened to
perform this office. Finally, towards the close of the day, when it was
clear that the Grandmother was about to play her last bank-note, there
could be seen standing behind her chair no fewer than six natives of
Poland--persons who, as yet, had been neither audible nor visible; and
as soon as ever the old lady played the note in question, they took no
further notice of her, but pushed their way past her chair to the
table; seized the money, and staked it--shouting and disputing the
while, and arguing with the "gentleman of honour" (who also had
forgotten the Grandmother's existence), as though he were their equal.
Even when the Grandmother had lost her all, and was returning (about
eight o'clock) to the hotel, some three or four Poles could not bring
themselves to leave her, but went on running beside her chair and
volubly protesting that the Grandmother had cheated them, and that she
ought to be made to surrender what was not her own. Thus the party
arrived at the hotel; whence, presently, the gang of rascals was
ejected neck and crop.

According to Potapitch's calculations, the Grandmother lost, that day,
a total of ninety thousand roubles, in addition to the money which she
had lost the day before. Every paper security which she had brought
with her--five percent bonds, internal loan scrip, and what not--she
had changed into cash. Also, I could not but marvel at the way in
which, for seven or eight hours at a stretch, she sat in that chair of
hers, almost never leaving the table. Again, Potapitch told me that
there were three occasions on which she really began to win; but that,
led on by false hopes, she was unable to tear herself away at the right
moment. Every gambler knows how a person may sit a day and a night at
cards without ever casting a glance to right or to left.

Meanwhile, that day some other very important events were passing in
our hotel. As early as eleven o'clock--that is to say, before the
Grandmother had quitted her rooms--the General and De Griers decided
upon their last stroke. In other words, on learning that the old lady
had changed her mind about departing, and was bent on setting out for
the Casino again, the whole of our gang (Polina only excepted)
proceeded en masse to her rooms, for the purpose of finally and frankly
treating with her. But the General, quaking and greatly apprehensive as
to his possible future, overdid things. After half an hour's prayers
and entreaties, coupled with a full confession of his debts, and even
of his passion for Mlle. Blanche (yes, he had quite lost his head), he
suddenly adopted a tone of menace, and started to rage at the old
lady--exclaiming that she was sullying the family honour, that she was
making a public scandal of herself, and that she was smirching the fair
name of Russia. The upshot was that the Grandmother turned him out of
the room with her stick (it was a real stick, too!). Later in the
morning he held several consultations with De Griers--the question
which occupied him being: Is it in any way possible to make use of the
police--to tell them that "this respected, but unfortunate, old lady
has gone out of her mind, and is squandering her last kopeck," or
something of the kind? In short, is it in any way possible to engineer
a species of supervision over, or of restraint upon, the old lady? De
Griers, however, shrugged his shoulders at this, and laughed in the
General's face, while the old warrior went on chattering volubly, and
running up and down his study. Finally De Griers waved his hand, and
disappeared from view; and by evening it became known that he had left
the hotel, after holding a very secret and important conference with
Mlle. Blanche. As for the latter, from early morning she had taken
decisive measures, by completely excluding the General from her
presence, and bestowing upon him not a glance. Indeed, even when the
General pursued her to the Casino, and met her walking arm in arm with
the Prince, he (the General) received from her and her mother not the
slightest recognition. Nor did the Prince himself bow. The rest of the
day Mlle. spent in probing the Prince, and trying to make him declare
himself; but in this she made a woeful mistake. The little incident
occurred in the evening. Suddenly Mlle. Blanche realised that the
Prince had not even a copper to his name, but, on the contrary, was
minded to borrow of her money wherewith to play at roulette. In high
displeasure she drove him from her presence, and shut herself up in her
room.

The same morning I went to see--or, rather, to look for--Mr. Astley,
but was unsuccessful in my quest. Neither in his rooms nor in the
Casino nor in the Park was he to be found; nor did he, that day, lunch
at his hotel as usual. However, at about five o'clock I caught sight of
him walking from the railway station to the Hotel d'Angleterre. He
seemed to be in a great hurry and much preoccupied, though in his face
I could discern no actual traces of worry or perturbation. He held out
to me a friendly hand, with his usual ejaculation of "Ah!" but did not
check his stride. I turned and walked beside him, but found, somehow,
that his answers forbade any putting of definite questions. Moreover, I
felt reluctant to speak to him of Polina; nor, for his part, did he ask
me any questions concerning her, although, on my telling him of the
Grandmother's exploits, he listened attentively and gravely, and then
shrugged his shoulders.

"She is gambling away everything that she has," I remarked.

"Indeed? She arrived at the Casino even before I had taken my departure
by train, so I knew she had been playing. If I should have time I will
go to the Casino to-night, and take a look at her. The thing interests
me."

"Where have you been today?" I asked--surprised at myself for having,
as yet, omitted to put to him that question.

"To Frankfort."

"On business?"

"On business."

What more was there to be asked after that? I accompanied him until, as
we drew level with the Hotel des Quatre Saisons, he suddenly nodded to
me and disappeared. For myself, I returned home, and came to the
conclusion that, even had I met him at two o'clock in the afternoon, I
should have learnt no more from him than I had done at five o'clock,
for the reason that I had no definite question to ask. It was bound to
have been so. For me to formulate the query which I really wished to
put was a simple impossibility.

Polina spent the whole of that day either in walking about the park
with the nurse and children or in sitting in her own room. For a long
while past she had avoided the General and had scarcely had a word to
say to him (scarcely a word, I mean, on any SERIOUS topic). Yes, that I
had noticed. Still, even though I was aware of the position in which
the General was placed, it had never occurred to me that he would have
any reason to avoid HER, or to trouble her with family explanations.
Indeed, when I was returning to the hotel after my conversation with
Astley, and chanced to meet Polina and the children, I could see that
her face was as calm as though the family disturbances had never
touched her. To my salute she responded with a slight bow, and I
retired to my room in a very bad humour.

Of course, since the affair with the Burmergelms I had exchanged not a
word with Polina, nor had with her any kind of intercourse. Yet I had
been at my wits' end, for, as time went on, there was arising in me an
ever-seething dissatisfaction. Even if she did not love me she ought
not to have trampled upon my feelings, nor to have accepted my
confessions with such contempt, seeing that she must have been aware
that I loved her (of her own accord she had allowed me to tell her as
much). Of course the situation between us had arisen in a curious
manner. About two months ago, I had noticed that she had a desire to
make me her friend, her confidant--that she was making trial of me for
the purpose; but, for some reason or another, the desired result had
never come about, and we had fallen into the present strange relations,
which had led me to address her as I had done. At the same time, if my
love was distasteful to her, why had she not FORBIDDEN me to speak of
it to her?

But she had not so forbidden me. On the contrary, there had been
occasions when she had even INVITED me to speak. Of course, this might
have been done out of sheer wantonness, for I well knew--I had remarked
it only too often--that, after listening to what I had to say, and
angering me almost beyond endurance, she loved suddenly to torture me
with some fresh outburst of contempt and aloofness! Yet she must have
known that I could not live without her. Three days had elapsed since
the affair with the Baron, and I could bear the severance no longer.
When, that afternoon, I met her near the Casino, my heart almost made
me faint, it beat so violently. She too could not live without me, for
had she not said that she had NEED of me? Or had that too been spoken
in jest?

That she had a secret of some kind there could be no doubt. What she
had said to the Grandmother had stabbed me to the heart. On a thousand
occasions I had challenged her to be open with me, nor could she have
been ignorant that I was ready to give my very life for her. Yet always
she had kept me at a distance with that contemptuous air of hers; or
else she had demanded of me, in lieu of the life which I offered to lay
at her feet, such escapades as I had perpetrated with the Baron. Ah,
was it not torture to me, all this? For could it be that her whole
world was bound up with the Frenchman? What, too, about Mr. Astley? The
affair was inexplicable throughout. My God, what distress it caused me!

Arrived home, I, in a fit of frenzy, indited the following:

"Polina Alexandrovna, I can see that there is approaching us an
exposure which will involve you too. For the last time I ask of
you--have you, or have you not, any need of my life? If you have, then
make such dispositions as you wish, and I shall always be discoverable
in my room if required. If you have need of my life, write or send for
me."

I sealed the letter, and dispatched it by the hand of a corridor
lacquey, with orders to hand it to the addressee in person. Though I
expected no answer, scarcely three minutes had elapsed before the
lacquey returned with "the compliments of a certain person."

Next, about seven o'clock, I was sent for by the General. I found him
in his study, apparently preparing to go out again, for his hat and
stick were lying on the sofa. When I entered he was standing in the
middle of the room--his feet wide apart, and his head bent down. Also,
he appeared to be talking to himself. But as soon as ever he saw me at
the door he came towards me in such a curious manner that involuntarily
I retreated a step, and was for leaving the room; whereupon he seized
me by both hands, and, drawing me towards the sofa, and seating himself
thereon, he forced me to sit down on a chair opposite him. Then,
without letting go of my hands, he exclaimed with quivering lips and a
sparkle of tears on his eyelashes:

"Oh, Alexis Ivanovitch! Save me, save me! Have some mercy upon me!"

For a long time I could not make out what he meant, although he kept
talking and talking, and constantly repeating to himself, "Have mercy,
mercy!" At length, however, I divined that he was expecting me to give
him something in the nature of advice--or, rather, that, deserted by
every one, and overwhelmed with grief and apprehension, he had
bethought himself of my existence, and sent for me to relieve his
feelings by talking and talking and talking.

In fact, he was in such a confused and despondent state of mind that,
clasping his hands together, he actually went down upon his knees and
begged me to go to Mlle. Blanche, and beseech and advise her to return
to him, and to accept him in marriage.

"But, General," I exclaimed, "possibly Mlle. Blanche has scarcely even
remarked my existence? What could I do with her?"

It was in vain that I protested, for he could understand nothing that
was said to him, Next he started talking about the Grandmother, but
always in a disconnected sort of fashion--his one thought being to send
for the police.

"In Russia," said he, suddenly boiling over with indignation, "or in
any well-ordered State where there exists a government, old women like
my mother are placed under proper guardianship. Yes, my good sir," he
went on, relapsing into a scolding tone as he leapt to his feet and
started to pace the room, "do you not know this" (he seemed to be
addressing some imaginary auditor in the corner) "--do you not know
this, that in Russia old women like her are subjected to restraint, the
devil take them?" Again he threw himself down upon the sofa.

A minute later, though sobbing and almost breathless, he managed to
gasp out that Mlle. Blanche had refused to marry him, for the reason
that the Grandmother had turned up in place of a telegram, and it was
therefore clear that he had no inheritance to look for. Evidently, he
supposed that I had hitherto been in entire ignorance of all this.
Again, when I referred to De Griers, the General made a gesture of
despair. "He has gone away," he said, "and everything which I possess
is mortgaged to him. I stand stripped to my skin. Even of the money
which you brought me from Paris, I know not if seven hundred francs be
left. Of course that sum will do to go on with, but, as regards the
future, I know nothing, I know nothing."

"Then how will you pay your hotel bill?" I cried in consternation. "And
what shall you do afterwards?"

He looked at me vaguely, but it was clear that he had not
understood--perhaps had not even heard--my questions. Then I tried to
get him to speak of Polina and the children, but he only returned brief
answers of "Yes, yes," and again started to maunder about the Prince,
and the likelihood of the latter marrying Mlle. Blanche. "What on earth
am I to do?" he concluded. "What on earth am I to do? Is this not
ingratitude? Is it not sheer ingratitude?" And he burst into tears.

Nothing could be done with such a man. Yet to leave him alone was
dangerous, for something might happen to him. I withdrew from his rooms
for a little while, but warned the nursemaid to keep an eye upon him,
as well as exchanged a word with the corridor lacquey (a very talkative
fellow), who likewise promised to remain on the look-out.

Hardly had I left the General, when Potapitch approached me with a
summons from the Grandmother. It was now eight o'clock, and she had
returned from the Casino after finally losing all that she possessed. I
found her sitting in her chair--much distressed and evidently fatigued.
Presently Martha brought her up a cup of tea and forced her to drink
it; yet, even then I could detect in the old lady's tone and manner a
great change.

"Good evening, Alexis Ivanovitch," she said slowly, with her head
drooping. "Pardon me for disturbing you again. Yes, you must pardon an
old, old woman like myself, for I have left behind me all that I
possess--nearly a hundred thousand roubles! You did quite right in
declining to come with me this evening. Now I am without money--without
a single groat. But I must not delay a moment; I must leave by the 9:30
train. I have sent for that English friend of yours, and am going to
beg of him three thousand francs for a week. Please try and persuade
him to think nothing of it, nor yet to refuse me, for I am still a rich
woman who possesses three villages and a couple of mansions. Yes, the
money shall be found, for I have not yet squandered EVERYTHING. I tell
you this in order that he may have no doubts about--Ah, but here he is!
Clearly he is a good fellow."

True enough, Astley had come hot-foot on receiving the Grandmother's
appeal. Scarcely stopping even to reflect, and with scarcely a word, he
counted out the three thousand francs under a note of hand which she
duly signed. Then, his business done, he bowed, and lost no time in
taking his departure.

"You too leave me, Alexis Ivanovitch," said the Grandmother. "All my
bones are aching, and I still have an hour in which to rest. Do not be
hard upon me, old fool that I am. Never again shall I blame young
people for being frivolous. I should think it wrong even to blame that
unhappy General of yours. Nevertheless, I do not mean to let him have
any of my money (which is all that he desires), for the reason that I
look upon him as a perfect blockhead, and consider myself, simpleton
though I be, at least wiser than HE is. How surely does God visit old
age, and punish it for its presumption! Well, good-bye. Martha, come
and lift me up."

However, I had a mind to see the old lady off; and, moreover, I was in
an expectant frame of mind--somehow I kept thinking that SOMETHING was
going to happen; wherefore, I could not rest quietly in my room, but
stepped out into the corridor, and then into the Chestnut Avenue for a
few minutes' stroll. My letter to Polina had been clear and firm, and
in the present crisis, I felt sure, would prove final. I had heard of
De Griers' departure, and, however much Polina might reject me as a
FRIEND, she might not reject me altogether as a SERVANT. She would need
me to fetch and carry for her, and I was ready to do so. How could it
have been otherwise?

Towards the hour of the train's departure I hastened to the station,
and put the Grandmother into her compartment--she and her party
occupying a reserved family saloon.

"Thanks for your disinterested assistance," she said at parting. "Oh,
and please remind Prascovia of what I said to her last night. I expect
soon to see her."

Then I returned home. As I was passing the door of the General's suite,
I met the nursemaid, and inquired after her master. "There is nothing
new to report, sir," she replied quietly. Nevertheless I decided to
enter, and was just doing so when I halted thunderstruck on the
threshold. For before me I beheld the General and Mlle.
Blanche--laughing gaily at one another!--while beside them, on the
sofa, there was seated her mother. Clearly the General was almost out
of his mind with joy, for he was talking all sorts of nonsense, and
bubbling over with a long-drawn, nervous laugh--a laugh which twisted
his face into innumerable wrinkles, and caused his eyes almost to
disappear.

Afterwards I learnt from Mlle. Blanche herself that, after dismissing
the Prince and hearing of the General's tears, she bethought her of
going to comfort the old man, and had just arrived for the purpose when
I entered. Fortunately, the poor General did not know that his fate had
been decided--that Mlle. had long ago packed her trunks in readiness
for the first morning train to Paris!

Hesitating a moment on the threshold I changed my mind as to entering,
and departed unnoticed. Ascending to my own room, and opening the door,
I perceived in the semi-darkness a figure seated on a chair in the
corner by the window. The figure did not rise when I entered, so I
approached it swiftly, peered at it closely, and felt my heart almost
stop beating. The figure was Polina!



XIV

The shock made me utter an exclamation.

"What is the matter? What is the matter?" she asked in a strange voice.
She was looking pale, and her eyes were dim.

"What is the matter?" I re-echoed. "Why, the fact that you are HERE!"

"If I am here, I have come with all that I have to bring," she said.
"Such has always been my way, as you shall presently see. Please light
a candle."

I did so; whereupon she rose, approached the table, and laid upon it an
open letter.

"Read it," she added.

"It is De Griers' handwriting!" I cried as I seized the document. My
hands were so tremulous that the lines on the pages danced before my
eyes. Although, at this distance of time, I have forgotten the exact
phraseology of the missive, I append, if not the precise words, at all
events the general sense.

"Mademoiselle," the document ran, "certain untoward circumstances
compel me to depart in haste. Of course, you have of yourself remarked
that hitherto I have always refrained from having any final explanation
with you, for the reason that I could not well state the whole
circumstances; and now to my difficulties the advent of the aged
Grandmother, coupled with her subsequent proceedings, has put the final
touch. Also, the involved state of my affairs forbids me to write with
any finality concerning those hopes of ultimate bliss upon which, for a
long while past, I have permitted myself to feed. I regret the past,
but at the same time hope that in my conduct you have never been able
to detect anything that was unworthy of a gentleman and a man of
honour. Having lost, however, almost the whole of my money in debts
incurred by your stepfather, I find myself driven to the necessity of
saving the remainder; wherefore, I have instructed certain friends of
mine in St. Petersburg to arrange for the sale of all the property
which has been mortgaged to myself. At the same time, knowing that, in
addition, your frivolous stepfather has squandered money which is
exclusively yours, I have decided to absolve him from a certain moiety
of the mortgages on his property, in order that you may be in a
position to recover of him what you have lost, by suing him in legal
fashion. I trust, therefore, that, as matters now stand, this action of
mine may bring you some advantage. I trust also that this same action
leaves me in the position of having fulfilled every obligation which is
incumbent upon a man of honour and refinement. Rest assured that your
memory will for ever remain graven in my heart."

"All this is clear enough," I commented. "Surely you did not expect
aught else from him?" Somehow I was feeling annoyed.

"I expected nothing at all from him," she replied--quietly enough, to
all outward seeming, yet with a note of irritation in her tone. "Long
ago I made up my mind on the subject, for I could read his thoughts,
and knew what he was thinking. He thought that possibly I should sue
him--that one day I might become a nuisance." Here Polina halted for a
moment, and stood biting her lips. "So of set purpose I redoubled my
contemptuous treatment of him, and waited to see what he would do. If a
telegram to say that we had become legatees had arrived from, St.
Petersburg, I should have flung at him a quittance for my foolish
stepfather's debts, and then dismissed him. For a long time I have
hated him. Even in earlier days he was not a man; and now!--Oh, how
gladly I could throw those fifty thousand roubles in his face, and spit
in it, and then rub the spittle in!"

"But the document returning the fifty-thousand rouble mortgage--has the
General got it? If so, possess yourself of it, and send it to De
Griers."

"No, no; the General has not got it."

"Just as I expected! Well, what is the General going to do?" Then an
idea suddenly occurred to me. "What about the Grandmother?" I asked.

Polina looked at me with impatience and bewilderment.

"What makes you speak of HER?" was her irritable inquiry. "I cannot go
and live with her. Nor," she added hotly, "will I go down upon my knees
to ANY ONE."

"Why should you?" I cried. "Yet to think that you should have loved De
Griers! The villain, the villain! But I will kill him in a duel. Where
is he now?"

"In Frankfort, where he will be staying for the next three days."

"Well, bid me do so, and I will go to him by the first train tomorrow,"
I exclaimed with enthusiasm.

She smiled.

"If you were to do that," she said, "he would merely tell you to be so
good as first to return him the fifty thousand francs. What, then,
would be the use of having a quarrel with him? You talk sheer nonsense."

I ground my teeth.

"The question," I went on, "is how to raise the fifty thousand francs.
We cannot expect to find them lying about on the floor. Listen. What of
Mr. Astley?" Even as I spoke a new and strange idea formed itself in my
brain.

Her eyes flashed fire.

"What? YOU YOURSELF wish me to leave you for him?" she cried with a
scornful look and a proud smile. Never before had she addressed me thus.

Then her head must have turned dizzy with emotion, for suddenly she
seated herself upon the sofa, as though she were powerless any longer
to stand.

A flash of lightning seemed to strike me as I stood there. I could
scarcely believe my eyes or my ears. She DID love me, then! It WAS to
me, and not to Mr. Astley, that she had turned! Although she, an
unprotected girl, had come to me in my room--in an hotel room--and had
probably compromised herself thereby, I had not understood!

Then a second mad idea flashed into my brain.

"Polina," I said, "give me but an hour. Wait here just one hour until I
return. Yes, you MUST do so. Do you not see what I mean? Just stay here
for that time."

And I rushed from the room without so much as answering her look of
inquiry. She called something after me, but I did not return.

Sometimes it happens that the most insane thought, the most impossible
conception, will become so fixed in one's head that at length one
believes the thought or the conception to be reality. Moreover, if with
the thought or the conception there is combined a strong, a passionate,
desire, one will come to look upon the said thought or conception as
something fated, inevitable, and foreordained--something bound to
happen. Whether by this there is connoted something in the nature of a
combination of presentiments, or a great effort of will, or a
self-annulment of one's true expectations, and so on, I do not know;
but, at all events that night saw happen to me (a night which I shall
never forget) something in the nature of the miraculous. Although the
occurrence can easily be explained by arithmetic, I still believe it to
have been a miracle. Yet why did this conviction take such a hold upon
me at the time, and remain with me ever since? Previously, I had
thought of the idea, not as an occurrence which was ever likely to come
about, but as something which NEVER could come about.

The time was a quarter past eleven o'clock when I entered the Casino in
such a state of hope (though, at the same time, of agitation) as I had
never before experienced. In the gaming-rooms there were still a large
number of people, but not half as many as had been present in the
morning.

At eleven o'clock there usually remained behind only the real, the
desperate gamblers--persons for whom, at spas, there existed nothing
beyond roulette, and who went thither for that alone. These gamesters
took little note of what was going on around them, and were interested
in none of the appurtenances of the season, but played from morning
till night, and would have been ready to play through the night until
dawn had that been possible. As it was, they used to disperse
unwillingly when, at midnight, roulette came to an end. Likewise, as
soon as ever roulette was drawing to a close and the head croupier had
called "Les trois derniers coups," most of them were ready to stake on
the last three rounds all that they had in their pockets--and, for the
most part, lost it. For my own part I proceeded towards the table at
which the Grandmother had lately sat; and, since the crowd around it
was not very large, I soon obtained standing room among the ring of
gamblers, while directly in front of me, on the green cloth, I saw
marked the word "Passe."

"Passe" was a row of numbers from 19 to 36 inclusive; while a row of
numbers from 1 to 18 inclusive was known as "Manque." But what had that
to do with me? I had not noticed--I had not so much as heard the
numbers upon which the previous coup had fallen, and so took no
bearings when I began to play, as, in my place, any SYSTEMATIC gambler
would have done. No, I merely extended my stock of twenty ten-gulden
pieces, and threw them down upon the space "Passe" which happened to be
confronting me.

"Vingt-deux!" called the croupier.

I had won! I staked upon the same again--both my original stake and my
winnings.

"Trente-et-un!" called the croupier.

Again I had won, and was now in possession of eighty ten-gulden pieces.
Next, I moved the whole eighty on to twelve middle numbers (a stake
which, if successful, would bring me in a triple profit, but also
involved a risk of two chances to one). The wheel revolved, and stopped
at twenty-four. Upon this I was paid out notes and gold until I had by
my side a total sum of two thousand gulden.

It was as in a fever that I moved the pile, en bloc, on to the red.
Then suddenly I came to myself (though that was the only time during
the evening's play when fear cast its cold spell over me, and showed
itself in a trembling of the hands and knees). For with horror I had
realised that I MUST win, and that upon that stake there depended all
my life.

"Rouge!" called the croupier. I drew a long breath, and hot shivers
went coursing over my body. I was paid out my winnings in
bank-notes--amounting, of course, to a total of four thousand florins,
eight hundred gulden (I could still calculate the amounts).

After that, I remember, I again staked two thousand florins upon twelve
middle numbers, and lost. Again I staked the whole of my gold, with
eight hundred gulden, in notes, and lost. Then madness seemed to come
upon me, and seizing my last two thousand florins, I staked them upon
twelve of the first numbers--wholly by chance, and at random, and
without any sort of reckoning. Upon my doing so there followed a moment
of suspense only comparable to that which Madame Blanchard must have
experienced when, in Paris, she was descending earthwards from a
balloon.

"Quatre!" called the croupier.

Once more, with the addition of my original stake, I was in possession
of six thousand florins! Once more I looked around me like a
conqueror--once more I feared nothing as I threw down four thousand of
these florins upon the black. The croupiers glanced around them, and
exchanged a few words; the bystanders murmured expectantly.

The black turned up. After that I do not exactly remember either my
calculations or the order of my stakings. I only remember that, as in a
dream, I won in one round sixteen thousand florins; that in the three
following rounds, I lost twelve thousand; that I moved the remainder
(four thousand) on to "Passe" (though quite unconscious of what I was
doing--I was merely waiting, as it were, mechanically, and without
reflection, for something) and won; and that, finally, four times in
succession I lost. Yes, I can remember raking in money by
thousands--but most frequently on the twelve, middle numbers, to which
I constantly adhered, and which kept appearing in a sort of regular
order--first, three or four times running, and then, after an interval
of a couple of rounds, in another break of three or four appearances.
Sometimes, this astonishing regularity manifested itself in patches; a
thing to upset all the calculations of note--taking gamblers who play
with a pencil and a memorandum book in their hands Fortune perpetrates
some terrible jests at roulette!

Since my entry not more than half an hour could have elapsed. Suddenly
a croupier informed me that I had, won thirty thousand florins, as well
as that, since the latter was the limit for which, at any one time, the
bank could make itself responsible, roulette at that table must close
for the night. Accordingly, I caught up my pile of gold, stuffed it
into my pocket, and, grasping my sheaf of bank-notes, moved to the
table in an adjoining salon where a second game of roulette was in
progress. The crowd followed me in a body, and cleared a place for me
at the table; after which, I proceeded to stake as before--that is to
say, at random and without calculating. What saved me from ruin I do
not know.

Of course there were times when fragmentary reckonings DID come
flashing into my brain. For instance, there were times when I attached
myself for a while to certain figures and coups--though always leaving
them, again before long, without knowing what I was doing.

In fact, I cannot have been in possession of all my faculties, for I
can remember the croupiers correcting my play more than once, owing to
my having made mistakes of the gravest order. My brows were damp with
sweat, and my hands were shaking. Also, Poles came around me to proffer
their services, but I heeded none of them. Nor did my luck fail me now.
Suddenly, there arose around me a loud din of talking and laughter.
"Bravo, bravo!" was the general shout, and some people even clapped
their hands. I had raked in thirty thousand florins, and again the bank
had had to close for the night!

"Go away now, go away now," a voice whispered to me on my right. The
person who had spoken to me was a certain Jew of Frankfurt--a man who
had been standing beside me the whole while, and occasionally helping
me in my play.

"Yes, for God's sake go," whispered a second voice in my left ear.
Glancing around, I perceived that the second voice had come from a
modestly, plainly dressed lady of rather less than thirty--a woman
whose face, though pale and sickly-looking, bore also very evident
traces of former beauty. At the moment, I was stuffing the crumpled
bank-notes into my pockets and collecting all the gold that was left on
the table. Seizing up my last note for five hundred gulden, I contrived
to insinuate it, unperceived, into the hand of the pale lady. An
overpowering impulse had made me do so, and I remember how her thin
little fingers pressed mine in token of her lively gratitude. The whole
affair was the work of a moment.

Then, collecting my belongings, I crossed to where trente et quarante
was being played--a game which could boast of a more aristocratic
public, and was played with cards instead of with a wheel. At this
diversion the bank made itself responsible for a hundred thousand
thalers as the limit, but the highest stake allowable was, as in
roulette, four thousand florins. Although I knew nothing of the
game--and I scarcely knew the stakes, except those on black and red--I
joined the ring of players, while the rest of the crowd massed itself
around me. At this distance of time I cannot remember whether I ever
gave a thought to Polina; I seemed only to be conscious of a vague
pleasure in seizing and raking in the bank-notes which kept massing
themselves in a pile before me.

But, as ever, fortune seemed to be at my back. As though of set
purpose, there came to my aid a circumstance which not infrequently
repeats itself in gaming. The circumstance is that not infrequently
luck attaches itself to, say, the red, and does not leave it for a
space of say, ten, or even fifteen, rounds in succession. Three days
ago I had heard that, during the previous week there had been a run of
twenty-two coups on the red--an occurrence never before known at
roulette--so that men spoke of it with astonishment. Naturally enough,
many deserted the red after a dozen rounds, and practically no one
could now be found to stake upon it. Yet upon the black also--the
antithesis of the red--no experienced gambler would stake anything, for
the reason that every practised player knows the meaning of "capricious
fortune." That is to say, after the sixteenth (or so) success of the
red, one would think that the seventeenth coup would inevitably fall
upon the black; wherefore, novices would be apt to back the latter in
the seventeenth round, and even to double or treble their stakes upon
it--only, in the end, to lose.

Yet some whim or other led me, on remarking that the red had come up
consecutively for seven times, to attach myself to that colour.
Probably this was mostly due to self-conceit, for I wanted to astonish
the bystanders with the riskiness of my play. Also, I remember
that--oh, strange sensation!--I suddenly, and without any challenge
from my own presumption, became obsessed with a DESIRE to take risks.
If the spirit has passed through a great many sensations, possibly it
can no longer be sated with them, but grows more excited, and demands
more sensations, and stronger and stronger ones, until at length it
falls exhausted. Certainly, if the rules of the game had permitted even
of my staking fifty thousand florins at a time, I should have staked
them. All of a sudden I heard exclamations arising that the whole thing
was a marvel, since the red was turning up for the fourteenth time!

"Monsieur a gagne cent mille florins," a voice exclaimed beside me.

I awoke to my senses. What? I had won a hundred thousand florins? If
so, what more did I need to win? I grasped the banknotes, stuffed them
into my pockets, raked in the gold without counting it, and started to
leave the Casino. As I passed through the salons people smiled to see
my bulging pockets and unsteady gait, for the weight which I was
carrying must have amounted to half a pood! Several hands I saw
stretched out in my direction, and as I passed I filled them with all
the money that I could grasp in my own. At length two Jews stopped me
near the exit.

"You are a bold young fellow," one said, "but mind you depart early
tomorrow--as early as you can--for if you do not you will lose
everything that you have won."

But I did not heed them. The Avenue was so dark that it was barely
possible to distinguish one's hand before one's face, while the
distance to the hotel was half a verst or so; but I feared neither
pickpockets nor highwaymen. Indeed, never since my boyhood have I done
that. Also, I cannot remember what I thought about on the way. I only
felt a sort of fearful pleasure--the pleasure of success, of conquest,
of power (how can I best express it?). Likewise, before me there
flitted the image of Polina; and I kept remembering, and reminding
myself, that it was to HER I was going, that it was in HER presence I
should soon be standing, that it was SHE to whom I should soon be able
to relate and show everything. Scarcely once did I recall what she had
lately said to me, or the reason why I had left her, or all those
varied sensations which I had been experiencing a bare hour and a half
ago. No, those sensations seemed to be things of the past, to be things
which had righted themselves and grown old, to be things concerning
which we needed to trouble ourselves no longer, since, for us, life was
about to begin anew. Yet I had just reached the end of the Avenue when
there DID come upon me a fear of being robbed or murdered. With each
step the fear increased until, in my terror, I almost started to run.
Suddenly, as I issued from the Avenue, there burst upon me the lights
of the hotel, sparkling with a myriad lamps! Yes, thanks be to God, I
had reached home!

Running up to my room, I flung open the door of it.  Polina was still
on the sofa, with a lighted candle in front of her, and her hands
clasped. As I entered she stared at me in astonishment (for, at the
moment, I must have presented a strange spectacle). All I did, however,
was to halt before her, and fling upon the table my burden of wealth.



XV

I remember, too, how, without moving from her place, or changing her
attitude, she gazed into my face.

"I have won two hundred thousand francs!" cried I as I pulled out my
last sheaf of bank-notes. The pile of paper currency occupied the whole
table. I could not withdraw my eyes from it. Consequently, for a moment
or two Polina escaped my mind. Then I set myself to arrange the pile in
order, and to sort the notes, and to mass the gold in a separate heap.
That done, I left everything where it lay, and proceeded to pace the
room with rapid strides as I lost myself in thought. Then I darted to
the table once more, and began to recount the money; until all of a
sudden, as though I had remembered something, I rushed to the door, and
closed and double-locked it. Finally I came to a meditative halt before
my little trunk.

"Shall I put the money there until tomorrow?" I asked, turning sharply
round to Polina as the recollection of her returned to me.

She was still in her old place--still making not a sound. Yet her eyes
had followed every one of my movements. Somehow in her face there was a
strange expression--an expression which I did not like. I think that I
shall not be wrong if I say that it indicated sheer hatred.

Impulsively I approached her.

"Polina," I said, "here are twenty-five thousand florins--fifty
thousand francs, or more. Take them, and tomorrow throw them in De
Griers' face."

She returned no answer.

"Or, if you should prefer," I continued, "let me take them to him
myself tomorrow--yes, early tomorrow morning. Shall I?"

Then all at once she burst out laughing, and laughed for a long while.
With astonishment and a feeling of offence I gazed at her. Her laughter
was too like the derisive merriment which she had so often indulged in
of late--merriment which had broken forth always at the time of my most
passionate explanations. At length she ceased, and frowned at me from
under her eyebrows.

"I am NOT going to take your money," she said contemptuously.

"Why not?" I cried. "Why not, Polina?"

"Because I am not in the habit of receiving money for nothing."

"But I am offering it to you as a FRIEND in the same way I would offer
you my very life."

Upon this she threw me a long, questioning glance, as though she were
seeking to probe me to the depths.

"You are giving too much for me," she remarked with a smile. "The
beloved of De Griers is not worth fifty thousand francs."

"Oh Polina, how can you speak so?" I exclaimed reproachfully. "Am I De
Griers?"

"You?" she cried with her eyes suddenly flashing. "Why, I HATE you!
Yes, yes, I HATE you! I love you no more than I do De Griers."

Then she buried her face in her hands, and relapsed into hysterics. I
darted to her side. Somehow I had an intuition of something having
happened to her which had nothing to do with myself. She was like a
person temporarily insane.

"Buy me, would you, would you? Would you buy me for fifty thousand
francs as De Griers did?" she gasped between her convulsive sobs.

I clasped her in my arms, kissed her hands and feet, and fell upon my
knees before her.

Presently the hysterical fit passed away, and, laying her hands upon my
