"Stake, stake! It is not YOUR money."

Accordingly I staked two ten-gulden pieces. The ball went hopping round
the wheel until it began to settle through the notches. Meanwhile the
Grandmother sat as though petrified, with my hand convulsively clutched
in hers.

"Zero!" called the croupier.

"There! You see, you see!" cried the old lady, as she turned and faced
me, wreathed in smiles. "I told you so! It was the Lord God himself who
suggested to me to stake those two coins. Now, how much ought I to
receive? Why do they not pay it out to me? Potapitch! Martha! Where are
they? What has become of our party? Potapitch, Potapitch!"

"Presently, Madame," I whispered. "Potapitch is outside, and they would
decline to admit him to these rooms. See! You are being paid out your
money. Pray take it." The croupiers were making up a heavy packet of
coins, sealed in blue paper, and containing fifty ten gulden pieces,
together with an unsealed packet containing another twenty. I handed
the whole to the old lady in a money-shovel.

"Faites le jeu, messieurs! Faites le jeu, messieurs! Rien ne va plus,"
proclaimed the croupier as once more he invited the company to stake,
and prepared to turn the wheel.

"We shall be too late! He is going to spin again! Stake, stake!" The
Grandmother was in a perfect fever. "Do not hang back! Be quick!" She
seemed almost beside herself, and nudged me as hard as she could.

"Upon what shall I stake, Madame?"

"Upon zero, upon zero! Again upon zero! Stake as much as ever you can.
How much have we got? Seventy ten-gulden pieces? We shall not miss
them, so stake twenty pieces at a time."

"Think a moment, Madame. Sometimes zero does not turn up for two
hundred rounds in succession. I assure you that you may lose all your
capital."

"You are wrong--utterly wrong. Stake, I tell you! What a chattering
tongue you have! I know perfectly well what I am doing." The old lady
was shaking with excitement.

"But the rules do not allow of more than 120 gulden being staked upon
zero at a time."

"How 'do not allow'? Surely you are wrong? Monsieur, monsieur--" here
she nudged the croupier who was sitting on her left, and preparing to
spin--"combien zero? Douze? Douze?"

I hastened to translate.

"Oui, Madame," was the croupier's polite reply. "No single stake must
exceed four thousand florins. That is the regulation."

"Then there is nothing else for it. We must risk in gulden."

"Le jeu est fait!" the croupier called. The wheel revolved, and stopped
at thirty. We had lost!

"Again, again, again! Stake again!" shouted the old lady. Without
attempting to oppose her further, but merely shrugging my shoulders, I
placed twelve more ten-gulden pieces upon the table. The wheel whirled
around and around, with the Grandmother simply quaking as she watched
its revolutions.

"Does she again think that zero is going to be the winning coup?"
thought I, as I stared at her in astonishment. Yet an absolute
assurance of winning was shining on her face; she looked perfectly
convinced that zero was about to be called again. At length the ball
dropped off into one of the notches.

"Zero!" cried the croupier.

"Ah!!!" screamed the old lady as she turned to me in a whirl of triumph.

I myself was at heart a gambler. At that moment I became acutely
conscious both of that fact and of the fact that my hands and knees
were shaking, and that the blood was beating in my brain. Of course
this was a rare occasion--an occasion on which zero had turned up no
less than three times within a dozen rounds; yet in such an event there
was nothing so very surprising, seeing that, only three days ago, I
myself had been a witness to zero turning up THREE TIMES IN SUCCESSION,
so that one of the players who was recording the coups on paper was
moved to remark that for several days past zero had never turned up at
all!

With the Grandmother, as with any one who has won a very large sum, the
management settled up with great attention and respect, since she was
fortunate to have to receive no less than 4200 gulden. Of these gulden
the odd 200 were paid her in gold, and the remainder in bank notes.

This time the old lady did not call for Potapitch; for that she was too
preoccupied. Though not outwardly shaken by the event (indeed, she
seemed perfectly calm), she was trembling inwardly from head to foot.
At length, completely absorbed in the game, she burst out:

"Alexis Ivanovitch, did not the croupier just say that 4000 florins
were the most that could be staked at any one time? Well, take these
4000, and stake them upon the red."

To oppose her was useless. Once more the wheel revolved.

"Rouge!" proclaimed the croupier.

Again 4000 florins--in all 8000!

"Give me them," commanded the Grandmother, "and stake the other 4000
upon the red again."

I did so.

"Rouge!" proclaimed the croupier.

"Twelve thousand!" cried the old lady. "Hand me the whole lot. Put the
gold into this purse here, and count the bank notes. Enough! Let us go
home. Wheel my chair away."



XI

THE chair, with the old lady beaming in it, was wheeled away towards
the doors at the further end of the salon, while our party hastened to
crowd around her, and to offer her their congratulations. In fact,
eccentric as was her conduct, it was also overshadowed by her triumph;
with the result that the General no longer feared to be publicly
compromised by being seen with such a strange woman, but, smiling in a
condescending, cheerfully familiar way, as though he were soothing a
child, he offered his greetings to the old lady. At the same time, both
he and the rest of the spectators were visibly impressed. Everywhere
people kept pointing to the Grandmother, and talking about her. Many
people even walked beside her chair, in order to view her the better
while, at a little distance, Astley was carrying on a conversation on
the subject with two English acquaintances of his. De Griers was simply
overflowing with smiles and compliments, and a number of fine ladies
were staring at the Grandmother as though she had been something
curious.

"Quelle victoire!" exclaimed De Griers.

"Mais, Madame, c'etait du feu!" added Mlle. Blanche with an elusive
smile.

"Yes, I have won twelve thousand florins," replied the old lady. "And
then there is all this gold. With it the total ought to come to nearly
thirteen thousand. How much is that in Russian money? Six thousand
roubles, I think?"

However, I calculated that the sum would exceed seven thousand
roubles--or, at the present rate of exchange, even eight thousand.

"Eight thousand roubles! What a splendid thing! And to think of you
simpletons sitting there and doing nothing! Potapitch! Martha! See what
I have won!"

"How DID you do it, Madame?" Martha exclaimed ecstatically. "Eight
thousand roubles!"

"And I am going to give you fifty gulden apiece. There they are."

Potapitch and Martha rushed towards her to kiss her hand.

"And to each bearer also I will give a ten-gulden piece. Let them have
it out of the gold, Alexis Ivanovitch. But why is this footman bowing
to me, and that other man as well? Are they congratulating me? Well,
let them have ten gulden apiece."

"Madame la princesse--Un pauvre expatrie--Malheur continuel--Les
princes russes sont si genereux!" said a man who for some time past had
been hanging around the old lady's chair--a personage who, dressed in a
shabby frockcoat and coloured waistcoat, kept taking off his cap, and
smiling pathetically.

"Give him ten gulden," said the Grandmother. "No, give him twenty. Now,
enough of that, or I shall never get done with you all. Take a moment's
rest, and then carry me away. Prascovia, I mean to buy a new dress for
you tomorrow. Yes, and for you too, Mlle. Blanche. Please translate,
Prascovia."

"Merci, Madame," replied Mlle. Blanche gratefully as she twisted her
face into the mocking smile which usually she kept only for the benefit
of De Griers and the General. The latter looked confused, and seemed
greatly relieved when we reached the Avenue.

"How surprised Theodosia too will be!" went on the Grandmother
(thinking of the General's nursemaid). "She, like yourselves, shall
have the price of a new gown. Here, Alexis Ivanovitch! Give that beggar
something" (a crooked-backed ragamuffin had approached to stare at us).

"But perhaps he is NOT a beggar--only a rascal," I replied.

"Never mind, never mind. Give him a gulden."

I approached the beggar in question, and handed him the coin. Looking
at me in great astonishment, he silently accepted the gulden, while
from his person there proceeded a strong smell of liquor.

"Have you never tried your luck, Alexis Ivanovitch?"

"No, Madame."

"Yet just now I could see that you were burning to do so?"

"I do mean to try my luck presently."

"Then stake everything upon zero. You have seen how it ought to be
done? How much capital do you possess?"

"Two hundred gulden, Madame."

"Not very much. See here; I will lend you five hundred if you wish.
Take this purse of mine." With that she added sharply to the General:
"But YOU need not expect to receive any."

This seemed to upset him, but he said nothing, and De Griers contented
himself by scowling.

"Que diable!" he whispered to the General. "C'est une terrible vieille."

"Look! Another beggar, another beggar!" exclaimed the grandmother.
"Alexis Ivanovitch, go and give him a gulden."

As she spoke I saw approaching us a grey-headed old man with a wooden
leg--a man who was dressed in a blue frockcoat and carrying a staff. He
looked like an old soldier. As soon as I tendered him the coin he fell
back a step or two, and eyed me threateningly.

"Was ist der Teufel!" he cried, and appended thereto a round dozen of
oaths.

"The man is a perfect fool!" exclaimed the Grandmother, waving her
hand. "Move on now, for I am simply famished. When we have lunched we
will return to that place."

"What?" cried I. "You are going to play again?"

"What else do you suppose?" she retorted. "Are you going only to sit
here, and grow sour, and let me look at you?"

"Madame," said De Griers confidentially, "les chances peuvent tourner.
Une seule mauvaise chance, et vous perdrez tout--surtout avec votre
jeu. C'etait terrible!"

"Oui; vous perdrez absolument," put in Mlle. Blanche.

"What has that got to do with YOU?" retorted the old lady. "It is not
YOUR money that I am going to lose; it is my own. And where is that Mr.
Astley of yours?" she added to myself.

"He stayed behind in the Casino."

"What a pity! He is such a nice sort of man!"

Arriving home, and meeting the landlord on the staircase, the
Grandmother called him to her side, and boasted to him of her
winnings--thereafter doing the same to Theodosia, and conferring upon
her thirty gulden; after which she bid her serve luncheon. The meal
over, Theodosia and Martha broke into a joint flood of ecstasy.

"I was watching you all the time, Madame," quavered Martha, "and I
asked Potapitch what mistress was trying to do. And, my word! the heaps
and heaps of money that were lying upon the table! Never in my life
have I seen so much money. And there were gentlefolk around it, and
other gentlefolk sitting down. So, I asked Potapitch where all these
gentry had come from; for, thought I, maybe the Holy Mother of God will
help our mistress among them. Yes, I prayed for you, Madame, and my
heart died within me, so that I kept trembling and trembling. The Lord
be with her, I thought to myself; and in answer to my prayer He has now
sent you what He has done! Even yet I tremble--I tremble to think of it
all."

"Alexis Ivanovitch," said the old lady, "after luncheon,--that is to
say, about four o'clock--get ready to go out with me again. But in the
meanwhile, good-bye. Do not forget to call a doctor, for I must take
the waters. Now go and get rested a little."

I left the Grandmother's presence in a state of bewilderment.

Vainly I endeavoured to imagine what would become of our party, or what
turn the affair would next take. I could perceive that none of the
party had yet recovered their presence of mind--least of all the
General. The factor of the Grandmother's appearance in place of the
hourly expected telegram to announce her death (with, of course,
resultant legacies) had so upset the whole scheme of intentions and
projects that it was with a decided feeling of apprehension and growing
paralysis that the conspirators viewed any future performances of the
old lady at roulette. Yet this second factor was not quite so important
as the first, since, though the Grandmother had twice declared that she
did not intend to give the General any money, that declaration was not
a complete ground for the abandonment of hope. Certainly De Griers,
who, with the General, was up to the neck in the affair, had not wholly
lost courage; and I felt sure that Mlle. Blanche also--Mlle. Blanche
who was not only as deeply involved as the other two, but also
expectant of becoming Madame General and an important legatee--would
not lightly surrender the position, but would use her every resource of
coquetry upon the old lady, in order to afford a contrast to the
impetuous Polina, who was difficult to understand, and lacked the art
of pleasing.

Yet now, when the Grandmother had just performed an astonishing feat at
roulette; now, when the old lady's personality had been so clearly and
typically revealed as that of a rugged, arrogant woman who was "tombee
en enfance"; now, when everything appeared to be lost,--why, now the
Grandmother was as merry as a child which plays with thistle-down.
"Good Lord!" I thought with, may God forgive me, a most malicious
smile, "every ten-gulden piece which the Grandmother staked must have
raised a blister on the General's heart, and maddened De Griers, and
driven Mlle. de Cominges almost to frenzy with the sight of this spoon
dangling before her lips." Another factor is the circumstance that even
when, overjoyed at winning, the Grandmother was distributing alms right
and left, and taking every one to be a beggar, she again snapped out to
the General that he was not going to be allowed any of her money--which
meant that the old lady had quite made up her mind on the point, and
was sure of it. Yes, danger loomed ahead.

All these thoughts passed through my mind during the few moments that,
having left the old lady's rooms, I was ascending to my own room on the
top storey. What most struck me was the fact that, though I had divined
the chief, the stoutest, threads which united the various actors in the
drama, I had, until now, been ignorant of the methods and secrets of
the game. For Polina had never been completely open with me. Although,
on occasions, it had happened that involuntarily, as it were, she had
revealed to me something of her heart, I had noticed that in most
cases--in fact, nearly always--she had either laughed away these
revelations, or grown confused, or purposely imparted to them a false
guise. Yes, she must have concealed a great deal from me. But, I had a
presentiment that now the end of this strained and mysterious situation
was approaching. Another stroke, and all would be finished and exposed.
Of my own fortunes, interested though I was in the affair, I took no
account. I was in the strange position of possessing but two hundred
gulden, of being at a loose end, of lacking both a post, the means of
subsistence, a shred of hope, and any plans for the future, yet of
caring nothing for these things. Had not my mind been so full of
Polina, I should have given myself up to the comical piquancy of the
impending denouement, and laughed my fill at it. But the thought of
Polina was torture to me. That her fate was settled I already had an
inkling; yet that was not the thought which was giving me so much
uneasiness. What I really wished for was to penetrate her secrets. I
wanted her to come to me and say, "I love you," and, if she would not
so come, or if to hope that she would ever do so was an unthinkable
absurdity--why, then there was nothing else for me to want. Even now I
do not know what I am wanting. I feel like a man who has lost his way.
I yearn but to be in her presence, and within the circle of her light
and splendour--to be there now, and forever, and for the whole of my
life. More I do not know. How can I ever bring myself to leave her?

On reaching the third storey of the hotel I experienced a shock. I was
just passing the General's suite when something caused me to look
round. Out of a door about twenty paces away there was coming Polina!
She hesitated for a moment on seeing me, and then beckoned me to her.

"Polina Alexandrovna!"

"Hush! Not so loud."

"Something startled me just now," I whispered, "and I looked round, and
saw you. Some electrical influence seems to emanate from your form."

"Take this letter," she went on with a frown (probably she had not even
heard my words, she was so preoccupied), "and hand it personally to Mr.
Astley. Go as quickly as ever you can, please. No answer will be
required. He himself--" She did not finish her sentence.

"To Mr. Astley?" I asked, in some astonishment.

But she had vanished again.

Aha! So the two were carrying on a correspondence! However, I set off
to search for Astley--first at his hotel, and then at the Casino, where
I went the round of the salons in vain. At length, vexed, and almost in
despair, I was on my way home when I ran across him among a troop of
English ladies and gentlemen who had been out for a ride. Beckoning to
him to stop, I handed him the letter. We had barely time even to look
at one another, but I suspected that it was of set purpose that he
restarted his horse so quickly.

Was jealousy, then, gnawing at me? At all events, I felt exceedingly
depressed, despite the fact that I had no desire to ascertain what the
correspondence was about. To think that HE should be her confidant! "My
friend, mine own familiar friend!" passed through my mind. Yet WAS
there any love in the matter? "Of course not," reason whispered to me.
But reason goes for little on such occasions. I felt that the matter
must be cleared up, for it was becoming unpleasantly complex.

I had scarcely set foot in the hotel when the commissionaire and the
landlord (the latter issuing from his room for the purpose) alike
informed me that I was being searched for high and low--that three
separate messages to ascertain my whereabouts had come down from the
General. When I entered his study I was feeling anything but kindly
disposed. I found there the General himself, De Griers, and Mlle.
Blanche, but not Mlle.'s mother, who was a person whom her reputed
daughter used only for show purposes, since in all matters of business
the daughter fended for herself, and it is unlikely that the mother
knew anything about them.

Some very heated discussion was in progress, and meanwhile the door of
the study was open--an unprecedented circumstance. As I approached the
portals I could hear loud voices raised, for mingled with the pert,
venomous accents of De Griers were Mlle. Blanche's excited, impudently
abusive tongue and the General's plaintive wail as, apparently, he
sought to justify himself in something. But on my appearance every one
stopped speaking, and tried to put a better face upon matters. De
Griers smoothed his hair, and twisted his angry face into a smile--into
the mean, studiedly polite French smile which I so detested; while the
downcast, perplexed General assumed an air of dignity--though only in a
mechanical way. On the other hand, Mlle. Blanche did not trouble to
conceal the wrath that was sparkling in her countenance, but bent her
gaze upon me with an air of impatient expectancy. I may remark that
hitherto she had treated me with absolute superciliousness, and, so far
from answering my salutations, had always ignored them.

"Alexis Ivanovitch," began the General in a tone of affectionate
upbraiding, "may I say to you that I find it strange, exceedingly
strange, that--In short, your conduct towards myself and my family-- In
a word, your--er--extremely--"

"Eh! Ce n'est pas ca," interrupted De Griers in a tone of impatience
and contempt (evidently he was the ruling spirit of the conclave). "Mon
cher monsieur, notre general se trompe. What he means to say is that he
warns you--he begs of you most earnestly--not to ruin him. I use the
expression because--"

"Why? Why?" I interjected.

"Because you have taken upon yourself to act as guide to this, to
this--how shall I express it?--to this old lady, a cette pauvre
terrible vieille. But she will only gamble away all that she
has--gamble it away like thistledown. You yourself have seen her play.
Once she has acquired the taste for gambling, she will never leave the
roulette-table, but, of sheer perversity and temper, will stake her
all, and lose it. In cases such as hers a gambler can never be torn
away from the game; and then--and then--"

"And then," asseverated the General, "you will have ruined my whole
family. I and my family are her heirs, for she has no nearer relatives
than ourselves. I tell you frankly that my affairs are in great--very
great disorder; how much they are so you yourself are partially aware.
If she should lose a large sum, or, maybe, her whole fortune, what will
become of us--of my children" (here the General exchanged a glance with
De Griers) "or of me?" (here he looked at Mlle. Blanche, who turned her
head contemptuously away). "Alexis Ivanovitch, I beg of you to save us."

"Tell me, General, how am I to do so? On what footing do I stand here?"

"Refuse to take her about. Simply leave her alone."

"But she would soon find some one else to take my place?"

"Ce n'est pas ca, ce n'est pas ca," again interrupted De Griers. "Que
diable! Do not leave her alone so much as advise her, persuade her,
draw her away. In any case do not let her gamble; find her some
counter-attraction."

"And how am I to do that? If only you would undertake the task,
Monsieur de Griers!" I said this last as innocently as possible, but at
once saw a rapid glance of excited interrogation pass from Mlle.
Blanche to De Griers, while in the face of the latter also there
gleamed something which he could not repress.

"Well, at the present moment she would refuse to accept my services,"
said he with a gesture. "But if, later--"

Here he gave Mlle. Blanche another glance which was full of meaning;
whereupon she advanced towards me with a bewitching smile, and seized
and pressed my hands. Devil take it, but how that devilish visage of
hers could change! At the present moment it was a visage full of
supplication, and as gentle in its expression as that of a smiling,
roguish infant. Stealthily, she drew me apart from the rest as though
the more completely to separate me from them; and, though no harm came
of her doing so--for it was merely a stupid manoeuvre, and no more--I
found the situation very unpleasant.

The General hastened to lend her his support.

"Alexis Ivanovitch," he began, "pray pardon me for having said what I
did just now--for having said more than I meant to do. I beg and
beseech you, I kiss the hem of your garment, as our Russian saying has
it, for you, and only you, can save us. I and Mlle. de Cominges, we all
of us beg of you--But you understand, do you not? Surely you
understand?" and with his eyes he indicated Mlle. Blanche. Truly he was
cutting a pitiful figure!

At this moment three low, respectful knocks sounded at the door; which,
on being opened, revealed a chambermaid, with Potapitch behind
her--come from the Grandmother to request that I should attend her in
her rooms. "She is in a bad humour," added Potapitch.

The time was half-past three.

"My mistress was unable to sleep," explained Potapitch; "so, after
tossing about for a while, she suddenly rose, called for her chair, and
sent me to look for you. She is now in the verandah."

"Quelle megere!" exclaimed De Griers.

True enough, I found Madame in the hotel verandah--much put about at my
delay, for she had been unable to contain herself until four o'clock.

"Lift me up," she cried to the bearers, and once more we set out for
the roulette-salons.



XII

The Grandmother was in an impatient, irritable frame of mind. Without
doubt the roulette had turned her head, for she appeared to be
indifferent to everything else, and, in general, seemed much
distraught. For instance, she asked me no questions about objects en
route, except that, when a sumptuous barouche passed us and raised a
cloud of dust, she lifted her hand for a moment, and inquired, "What
was that?" Yet even then she did not appear to hear my reply, although
at times her abstraction was interrupted by sallies and fits of sharp,
impatient fidgeting. Again, when I pointed out to her the Baron and
Baroness Burmergelm walking to the Casino, she merely looked at them in
an absent-minded sort of way, and said with complete indifference,
"Ah!" Then, turning sharply to Potapitch and Martha, who were walking
behind us, she rapped out:

"Why have YOU attached yourselves to the party? We are not going to
take you with us every time. Go home at once." Then, when the servants
had pulled hasty bows and departed, she added to me: "You are all the
escort I need."

At the Casino the Grandmother seemed to be expected, for no time was
lost in procuring her former place beside the croupier. It is my
opinion that though croupiers seem such ordinary, humdrum
officials--men who care nothing whether the bank wins or loses--they
are, in reality, anything but indifferent to the bank's losing, and are
given instructions to attract players, and to keep a watch over the
bank's interests; as also, that for such services, these officials are
awarded prizes and premiums. At all events, the croupiers of
Roulettenberg seemed to look upon the Grandmother as their lawful
prey--whereafter there befell what our party had foretold.

It happened thus:

As soon as ever we arrived the Grandmother ordered me to stake twelve
ten-gulden pieces in succession upon zero. Once, twice, and thrice I
did so, yet zero never turned up.

"Stake again," said the old lady with an impatient nudge of my elbow,
and I obeyed.

"How many times have we lost?" she inquired--actually grinding her
teeth in her excitement.

"We have lost 144 ten-gulden pieces," I replied. "I tell you, Madame,
that zero may not turn up until nightfall."

"Never mind," she interrupted. "Keep on staking upon zero, and also
stake a thousand gulden upon rouge. Here is a banknote with which to do
so."

The red turned up, but zero missed again, and we only got our thousand
gulden back.

"But you see, you see," whispered the old lady. "We have now recovered
almost all that we staked. Try zero again. Let us do so another ten
times, and then leave off."

By the fifth round, however, the Grandmother was weary of the scheme.

"To the devil with that zero!" she exclaimed. "Stake four thousand
gulden upon the red."

"But, Madame, that will be so much to venture!" I remonstrated.
"Suppose the red should not turn up?" The Grandmother almost struck me
in her excitement. Her agitation was rapidly making her quarrelsome.
Consequently, there was nothing for it but to stake the whole four
thousand gulden as she had directed.

The wheel revolved while the Grandmother sat as bolt upright, and with
as proud and quiet a mien, as though she had not the least doubt of
winning.

"Zero!" cried the croupier.

At first the old lady failed to understand the situation; but, as soon
as she saw the croupier raking in her four thousand gulden, together
with everything else that happened to be lying on the table, and
recognised that the zero which had been so long turning up, and on
which we had lost nearly two hundred ten-gulden pieces, had at length,
as though of set purpose, made a sudden reappearance--why, the poor old
lady fell to cursing it, and to throwing herself about, and wailing and
gesticulating at the company at large. Indeed, some people in our
vicinity actually burst out laughing.

"To think that that accursed zero should have turned up NOW!" she
sobbed. "The accursed, accursed thing! And, it is all YOUR fault," she
added, rounding upon me in a frenzy. "It was you who persuaded me to
cease staking upon it."

"But, Madame, I only explained the game to you. How am I to answer for
every mischance which may occur in it?"

"You and your mischances!" she whispered threateningly. "Go! Away at
once!"

"Farewell, then, Madame." And I turned to depart.

"No--stay," she put in hastily. "Where are you going to? Why should you
leave me? You fool! No, no... stay here. It is I who was the fool. Tell
me what I ought to do."

"I cannot take it upon myself to advise you, for you will only blame me
if I do so. Play at your own discretion. Say exactly what you wish
staked, and I will stake it."

"Very well. Stake another four thousand gulden upon the red. Take this
banknote to do it with. I have still got twenty thousand roubles in
actual cash."

"But," I whispered, "such a quantity of money--"

"Never mind. I cannot rest until I have won back my losses. Stake!"

I staked, and we lost.

"Stake again, stake again--eight thousand at a stroke!"

"I cannot, Madame. The largest stake allowed is four thousand gulden."

"Well, then; stake four thousand."

This time we won, and the Grandmother recovered herself a little.

"You see, you see!" she exclaimed as she nudged me. "Stake another four
thousand."

I did so, and lost. Again, and yet again, we lost. "Madame, your twelve
thousand gulden are now gone," at length I reported.

"I see they are," she replied with, as it were, the calmness of
despair. "I see they are," she muttered again as she gazed straight in
front of her, like a person lost in thought. "Ah well, I do not mean to
rest until I have staked another four thousand."

"But you have no money with which to do it, Madame. In this satchel I
can see only a few five percent bonds and some transfers--no actual
cash."

"And in the purse?"

"A mere trifle."

"But there is a money-changer's office here, is there not? They told me
I should be able to get any sort of paper security changed!"

"Quite so; to any amount you please. But you will lose on the
transaction what would frighten even a Jew."

"Rubbish! I am DETERMINED to retrieve my losses. Take me away, and call
those fools of bearers."

I wheeled the chair out of the throng, and, the bearers making their
appearance, we left the Casino.

"Hurry, hurry!" commanded the Grandmother. "Show me the nearest way to
the money-changer's. Is it far?"

"A couple of steps, Madame."

At the turning from the square into the Avenue we came face to face
with the whole of our party--the General, De Griers, Mlle. Blanche, and
her mother. Only Polina and Mr. Astley were absent.

"Well, well, well!" exclaimed the Grandmother. "But we have no time to
stop. What do you want? I can't talk to you here."

I dropped behind a little, and immediately was pounced upon by De
Griers.

"She has lost this morning's winnings," I whispered, "and also twelve
thousand gulden of her original money. At the present moment we are
going to get some bonds changed."

De Griers stamped his foot with vexation, and hastened to communicate
the tidings to the General. Meanwhile we continued to wheel the old
lady along.

"Stop her, stop her," whispered the General in consternation.

"You had better try and stop her yourself," I returned--also in a
whisper.

"My good mother," he said as he approached her, "--my good mother, pray
let, let--" (his voice was beginning to tremble and sink) "--let us
hire a carriage, and go for a drive. Near here there is an enchanting
view to be obtained. We-we-we were just coming to invite you to go and
see it."

"Begone with you and your views!" said the Grandmother angrily as she
waved him away.

"And there are trees there, and we could have tea under them,"
continued the General--now in utter despair.

"Nous boirons du lait, sur l'herbe fraiche," added De Griers with the
snarl almost of a wild beast.

"Du lait, de l'herbe fraiche"--the idyll, the ideal of the Parisian
bourgeois--his whole outlook upon "la nature et la verite"!

"Have done with you and your milk!" cried the old lady. "Go and stuff
YOURSELF as much as you like, but my stomach simply recoils from the
idea. What are you stopping for? I have nothing to say to you."

"Here we are, Madame," I announced. "Here is the moneychanger's office."

I entered to get the securities changed, while the Grandmother remained
outside in the porch, and the rest waited at a little distance, in
doubt as to their best course of action. At length the old lady turned
such an angry stare upon them that they departed along the road towards
the Casino.

The process of changing involved complicated calculations which soon
necessitated my return to the Grandmother for instructions.

"The thieves!" she exclaimed as she clapped her hands together. "Never
mind, though. Get the documents cashed--No; send the banker out to me,"
she added as an afterthought.

"Would one of the clerks do, Madame?"

"Yes, one of the clerks. The thieves!"

The clerk consented to come out when he perceived that he was being
asked for by an old lady who was too infirm to walk; after which the
Grandmother began to upbraid him at length, and with great vehemence,
for his alleged usuriousness, and to bargain with him in a mixture of
Russian, French, and German--I acting as interpreter. Meanwhile, the
grave-faced official eyed us both, and silently nodded his head. At the
Grandmother, in particular, he gazed with a curiosity which almost
bordered upon rudeness. At length, too, he smiled.

"Pray recollect yourself!" cried the old lady. "And may my money choke
you! Alexis Ivanovitch, tell him that we can easily repair to someone
else."

"The clerk says that others will give you even less than he."

Of what the ultimate calculations consisted I do not exactly remember,
but at all events they were alarming. Receiving twelve thousand florins
in gold, I took also the statement of accounts, and carried it out to
the Grandmother.

"Well, well," she said, "I am no accountant. Let us hurry away, hurry
away." And she waved the paper aside.

"Neither upon that accursed zero, however, nor upon that equally
accursed red do I mean to stake a cent," I muttered to myself as I
entered the Casino.

This time I did all I could to persuade the old lady to stake as little
as possible--saying that a turn would come in the chances when she
would be at liberty to stake more. But she was so impatient that,
though at first she agreed to do as I suggested, nothing could stop her
when once she had begun. By way of prelude she won stakes of a hundred
and two hundred gulden.

"There you are!" she said as she nudged me. "See what we have won!
Surely it would be worth our while to stake four thousand instead of a
hundred, for we might win another four thousand, and then--! Oh, it was
YOUR fault before--all your fault!"

I felt greatly put out as I watched her play, but I decided to hold my
tongue, and to give her no more advice.

Suddenly De Griers appeared on the scene. It seemed that all this while
he and his companions had been standing beside us--though I noticed
that Mlle. Blanche had withdrawn a little from the rest, and was
engaged in flirting with the Prince. Clearly the General was greatly
put out at this. Indeed, he was in a perfect agony of vexation. But
Mlle. was careful never to look his way, though he did his best to
attract her notice. Poor General! By turns his face blanched and
reddened, and he was trembling to such an extent that he could scarcely
follow the old lady's play. At length Mlle. and the Prince took their
departure, and the General followed them.

"Madame, Madame," sounded the honeyed accents of De Griers as he leant
over to whisper in the Grandmother's ear. "That stake will never win.
No, no, it is impossible," he added in Russian with a writhe. "No, no!"

"But why not?" asked the Grandmother, turning round. "Show me what I
ought to do."

Instantly De Griers burst into a babble of French as he advised, jumped
about, declared that such and such chances ought to be waited for, and
started to make calculations of figures. All this he addressed to me in
my capacity as translator--tapping the table the while with his finger,
and pointing hither and thither. At length he seized a pencil, and
began to reckon sums on paper until he had exhausted the Grandmother's
patience.

"Away with you!" she interrupted. "You talk sheer nonsense, for, though
you keep on saying 'Madame, Madame,' you haven't the least notion what
ought to be done. Away with you, I say!"

"Mais, Madame," cooed De Griers--and straightway started afresh with
his fussy instructions.

"Stake just ONCE, as he advises," the Grandmother said to me, "and then
we shall see what we shall see. Of course, his stake MIGHT win."

As a matter of fact, De Grier's one object was to distract the old lady
from staking large sums; wherefore, he now suggested to her that she
should stake upon certain numbers, singly and in groups. Consequently,
in accordance with his instructions, I staked a ten-gulden piece upon
several odd numbers in the first twenty, and five ten-gulden pieces
upon certain groups of numbers-groups of from twelve to eighteen, and
from eighteen to twenty-four. The total staked amounted to 160 gulden.

The wheel revolved. "Zero!" cried the croupier.

We had lost it all!

"The fool!" cried the old lady as she turned upon De Griers. "You
infernal Frenchman, to think that you should advise! Away with you!
Though you fuss and fuss, you don't even know what you're talking
about."

Deeply offended, De Griers shrugged his shoulders, favoured the
Grandmother with a look of contempt, and departed. For some time past
he had been feeling ashamed of being seen in such company, and this had
proved the last straw.

An hour later we had lost everything in hand.

"Home!" cried the Grandmother.

Not until we had turned into the Avenue did she utter a word; but from
that point onwards, until we arrived at the hotel, she kept venting
exclamations of "What a fool I am! What a silly old fool I am, to be
sure!"

Arrived at the hotel, she called for tea, and then gave orders for her
luggage to be packed.

"We are off again," she announced.

"But whither, Madame?" inquired Martha.

"What business is that of YOURS? Let the cricket stick to its hearth.
[The Russian form of "Mind your own business."] Potapitch, have
everything packed, for we are returning to Moscow at once. I have
fooled away fifteen thousand roubles."

"Fifteen thousand roubles, good mistress? My God!" And Potapitch spat
upon his hands--probably to show that he was ready to serve her in any
way he could.

"Now then, you fool! At once you begin with your weeping and wailing!
Be quiet, and pack. Also, run downstairs, and get my hotel bill."

"The next train leaves at 9:30, Madame," I interposed, with a view to
checking her agitation.

"And what is the time now?"

"Half-past eight."

"How vexing! But, never mind. Alexis Ivanovitch, I have not a kopeck
left; I have but these two bank notes. Please run to the office and get
them changed. Otherwise I shall have nothing to travel with."

Departing on her errand, I returned half an hour later to find the
whole party gathered in her rooms. It appeared that the news of her
impending departure for Moscow had thrown the conspirators into
consternation even greater than her losses had done. For, said they,
even if her departure should save her fortune, what will become of the
General later? And who is to repay De Griers? Clearly Mlle. Blanche
would never consent to wait until the Grandmother was dead, but would
at once elope with the Prince or someone else. So they had all gathered
together--endeavouring to calm and dissuade the Grandmother. Only
Polina was absent. For her part the Grandmother had nothing for the
party but abuse.

"Away with you, you rascals!" she was shouting. "What have my affairs
to do with you? Why, in particular, do you"--here she indicated De
Griers--"come sneaking here with your goat's beard? And what do
YOU"--here she turned to Mlle. Blanche "want of me? What are YOU
finicking for?"

"Diantre!" muttered Mlle. under her breath, but her eyes were flashing.
Then all at once she burst into a laugh and left the room--crying to
the General as she did so: "Elle vivra cent ans!"

"So you have been counting upon my death, have you?" fumed the old
lady. "Away with you! Clear them out of the room, Alexis Ivanovitch.
What business is it of THEIRS? It is not THEIR money that I have been
squandering, but my own."

The General shrugged his shoulders, bowed, and withdrew, with De Griers
behind him.

"Call Prascovia," commanded the Grandmother, and in five minutes Martha
reappeared with Polina, who had been sitting with the children in her
own room (having purposely determined not to leave it that day). Her
face looked grave and careworn.

"Prascovia," began the Grandmother, "is what I have just heard through
a side wind true--namely, that this fool of a stepfather of yours is
going to marry that silly whirligig of a Frenchwoman--that actress, or
something worse? Tell me, is it true?"

"I do not know FOR CERTAIN, Grandmamma," replied Polina; "but from
Mlle. Blanche's account (for she does not appear to think it necessary
to conceal anything) I conclude that--"

"You need not say any more," interrupted the Grandmother energetically.
"I understand the situation. I always thought we should get something
like this from him, for I always looked upon him as a futile, frivolous
fellow who gave himself unconscionable airs on the fact of his being a
general (though he only became one because he retired as a colonel).
Yes, I know all about the sending of the telegrams to inquire whether
'the old woman is likely to turn up her toes soon.' Ah, they were
looking for the legacies! Without money that wretched woman (what is
her name?--Oh, De Cominges) would never dream of accepting the General
and his false teeth--no, not even for him to be her lacquey--since she
herself, they say, possesses a pile of money, and lends it on interest,
and makes a good thing out of it. However, it is not you, Prascovia,
that I am blaming; it was not you who sent those telegrams. Nor, for
that matter, do I wish to recall old scores. True, I know that you are
a vixen by nature--that you are a wasp which will sting one if one
touches it--yet, my heart is sore for you, for I loved your mother,
Katerina. Now, will you leave everything here, and come away with me?
Otherwise, I do not know what is to become of you, and it is not right
that you should continue living with these people. Nay," she
interposed, the moment that Polina attempted to speak, "I have not yet
finished. I ask of you nothing in return. My house in Moscow is, as you
know, large enough for a palace, and you could occupy a whole floor of
it if you liked, and keep away from me for weeks together. Will you
come with me or will you not?"

"First of all, let me ask of YOU," replied Polina, "whether you are
intending to depart at once?"

"What? You suppose me to be jesting? I have said that I am going, and I
AM going. Today I have squandered fifteen thousand roubles at that
accursed roulette of yours, and though, five years ago, I promised the
people of a certain suburb of Moscow to build them a stone church in
place of a wooden one, I have been fooling away my money here! However,
I am going back now to build my church."

"But what about the waters, Grandmamma? Surely you came here to take
the waters?"

"You and your waters! Do not anger me, Prascovia. Surely you are trying
to? Say, then: will you, or will you not, come with me?"

"Grandmamma," Polina replied with deep feeling, "I am very, very
grateful to you for the shelter which you have so kindly offered me.
Also, to a certain extent you have guessed my position aright, and I am
beholden to you to such an extent that it may be that I will come and
live with you, and that very soon; yet there are important reasons
why--why I cannot make up my mind just yet. If you would let me have,
say, a couple of weeks to decide in--?"

"You mean that you are NOT coming?"

"I mean only that I cannot come just yet. At all events, I could not
well leave my little brother and sister here, since, since--if I were
to leave them--they would be abandoned altogether. But if, Grandmamma,
you would take the little ones AND myself, then, of course, I could
come with you, and would do all I could to serve you" (this she said
with great earnestness). "Only, without the little ones I CANNOT come."

"Do not make a fuss" (as a matter of fact Polina never at any time
either fussed or wept). "The Great Foster--Father [Translated
literally--The Great Poulterer] can find for all his chicks a place.
You are not coming without the children? But see here, Prascovia. I
wish you well, and nothing but well: yet I have divined the reason why
you will not come. Yes, I know all, Prascovia. That Frenchman will
never bring you good of any sort."

Polina coloured hotly, and even I started. "For," thought I to myself,
"every one seems to know about that affair. Or perhaps I am the only
one who does not know about it?"

"Now, now! Do not frown," continued the Grandmother. "But I do not
intend to slur things over. You will take care that no harm befalls
you, will you not? For you are a girl of sense, and I am sorry for
you--I regard you in a different light to the rest of them. And now,
please, leave me. Good-bye."

"But let me stay with you a little longer," said Polina.

"No," replied the other; "you need not. Do not bother me, for you and
all of them have tired me out."

Yet when Polina tried to kiss the Grandmother's hand, the old lady
withdrew it, and herself kissed the girl on the cheek. As she passed
me, Polina gave me a momentary glance, and then as swiftly averted her
eyes.

"And good-bye to you, also, Alexis Ivanovitch. The train starts in an
hour's time, and I think that you must be weary of me. Take these five
