informed Muishkin that his father had lately found a new interpretation
of the star called "wormwood," which fell upon the water-springs, as
described in the Apocalypse. He had decided that it meant the network of
railroads spread over the face of Europe at the present time. The
prince refused to believe that Lebedeff could have given such an
interpretation, and they decided to ask him about it at the earliest
opportunity. Vera related how Keller had taken up his abode with them on
the previous evening. She thought he would remain for some time, as he
was greatly pleased with the society of General Ivolgin and of the
whole family. But he declared that he had only come to them in order
to complete his education! The prince always enjoyed the company of
Lebedeff's children, and today it was especially welcome, for Colia did
not appear all day. Early that morning he had started for Petersburg.
Lebedeff also was away on business. But Gavrila Ardalionovitch had
promised to visit Muishkin, who eagerly awaited his coming.

About seven in the evening, soon after dinner, he arrived. At the first
glance it struck the prince that he, at any rate, must know all the
details of last night's affair. Indeed, it would have been impossible
for him to remain in ignorance considering the intimate relationship
between him, Varvara Ardalionovna, and Ptitsin. But although he and the
prince were intimate, in a sense, and although the latter had placed
the Burdovsky affair in his hands--and this was not the only mark of
confidence he had received--it seemed curious how many matters there
were that were tacitly avoided in their conversations. Muishkin thought
that Gania at times appeared to desire more cordiality and frankness.
It was apparent now, when he entered, that he was convinced that the
moment for breaking the ice between them had come at last.

But all the same Gania was in haste, for his sister was waiting at
Lebedeff's to consult him on an urgent matter of business. If he had
anticipated impatient questions, or impulsive confidences, he was
soon undeceived. The prince was thoughtful, reserved, even a little
absent-minded, and asked none of the questions--one in particular--that
Gania had expected. So he imitated the prince's demeanour, and talked
fast and brilliantly upon all subjects but the one on which their
thoughts were engaged. Among other things Gania told his host that
Nastasia Philipovna had been only four days in Pavlofsk, and that
everyone was talking about her already. She was staying with Daria
Alexeyevna, in an ugly little house in Mattrossky Street, but drove
about in the smartest carriage in the place. A crowd of followers
had pursued her from the first, young and old. Some escorted her on
horse-back when she took the air in her carriage.

She was as capricious as ever in the choice of her acquaintances, and
admitted few into her narrow circle. Yet she already had a numerous
following and many champions on whom she could depend in time of need.
One gentleman on his holiday had broken off his engagement on her
account, and an old general had quarrelled with his only son for the
same reason.

She was accompanied sometimes in her carriage by a girl of sixteen,
a distant relative of her hostess. This young lady sang very well; in
fact, her music had given a kind of notoriety to their little house.
Nastasia, however, was behaving with great discretion on the whole. She
dressed quietly, though with such taste as to drive all the ladies
in Pavlofsk mad with envy, of that, as well as of her beauty and her
carriage and horses.

"As for yesterday's episode," continued Gania, "of course it was
pre-arranged." Here he paused, as though expecting to be asked how
he knew that. But the prince did not inquire. Concerning Evgenie
Pavlovitch, Gania stated, without being asked, that he believed the
former had not known Nastasia Philipovna in past years, but that he had
probably been introduced to her by somebody in the park during these
four days. As to the question of the IOU's she had spoken of, there
might easily be something in that; for though Evgenie was undoubtedly
a man of wealth, yet certain of his affairs were equally undoubtedly in
disorder. Arrived at this interesting point, Gania suddenly broke off,
and said no more about Nastasia's prank of the previous evening.

At last Varvara Ardalionovna came in search of her brother, and remained
for a few minutes. Without Muishkin's asking her, she informed him that
Evgenie Pavlovitch was spending the day in Petersburg, and perhaps would
remain there over tomorrow; and that her husband had also gone to town,
probably in connection with Evgenie Pavlovitch's affairs.

"Lizabetha Prokofievna is in a really fiendish temper today," she
added, as she went out, "but the most curious thing is that Aglaya has
quarrelled with her whole family; not only with her father and mother,
but with her sisters also. It is not a good sign." She said all this
quite casually, though it was extremely important in the eyes of
the prince, and went off with her brother. Regarding the episode of
"Pavlicheff's son," Gania had been absolutely silent, partly from a kind
of false modesty, partly, perhaps, to "spare the prince's feelings." The
latter, however, thanked him again for the trouble he had taken in the
affair.

Muishkin was glad enough to be left alone. He went out of the garden,
crossed the road, and entered the park. He wished to reflect, and to
make up his mind as to a certain "step." This step was one of those
things, however, which are not thought out, as a rule, but decided for
or against hastily, and without much reflection. The fact is, he felt a
longing to leave all this and go away--go anywhere, if only it were
far enough, and at once, without bidding farewell to anyone. He felt a
presentiment that if he remained but a few days more in this place, and
among these people, he would be fixed there irrevocably and permanently.
However, in a very few minutes he decided that to run away was
impossible; that it would be cowardly; that great problems lay before
him, and that he had no right to leave them unsolved, or at least to
refuse to give all his energy and strength to the attempt to solve them.
Having come to this determination, he turned and went home, his walk
having lasted less than a quarter of an hour. At that moment he was
thoroughly unhappy.

Lebedeff had not returned, so towards evening Keller managed to
penetrate into the prince's apartments. He was not drunk, but in a
confidential and talkative mood. He announced that he had come to tell
the story of his life to Muishkin, and had only remained at Pavlofsk for
that purpose. There was no means of turning him out; nothing short of an
earthquake would have removed him.

In the manner of one with long hours before him, he began his history;
but after a few incoherent words he jumped to the conclusion, which
was that "having ceased to believe in God Almighty, he had lost every
vestige of morality, and had gone so far as to commit a theft." "Could
you imagine such a thing?" said he.

"Listen to me, Keller," returned the prince. "If I were in your place, I
should not acknowledge that unless it were absolutely necessary for some
reason. But perhaps you are making yourself out to be worse than you
are, purposely?"

"I should tell it to no one but yourself, prince, and I only name it now
as a help to my soul's evolution. When I die, that secret will die with
me! But, excellency, if you knew, if you only had the least idea, how
difficult it is to get money nowadays! Where to find it is the question.
Ask for a loan, the answer is always the same: 'Give us gold, jewels, or
diamonds, and it will be quite easy.' Exactly what one has not got! Can
you picture that to yourself? I got angry at last, and said, 'I
suppose you would accept emeralds?' 'Certainly, we accept emeralds with
pleasure. Yes!' 'Well, that's all right,' said I. 'Go to the devil, you
den of thieves!' And with that I seized my hat, and walked out."

"Had you any emeralds?" asked the prince.

"What? I have emeralds? Oh, prince! with what simplicity, with what
almost pastoral simplicity, you look upon life!"

Could not something be made of this man under good influences? asked the
prince of himself, for he began to feel a kind of pity for his visitor.
He thought little of the value of his own personal influence, not from
a sense of humility, but from his peculiar way of looking at things
in general. Imperceptibly the conversation grew more animated and more
interesting, so that neither of the two felt anxious to bring it to a
close. Keller confessed, with apparent sincerity, to having been guilty
of many acts of such a nature that it astonished the prince that he
could mention them, even to him. At every fresh avowal he professed the
deepest repentance, and described himself as being "bathed in tears";
but this did not prevent him from putting on a boastful air at times,
and some of his stories were so absurdly comical that both he and the
prince laughed like madmen.

"One point in your favour is that you seem to have a child-like mind,
and extreme truthfulness," said the prince at last. "Do you know that
that atones for much?"

"I am assuredly noble-minded, and chivalrous to a degree!" said Keller,
much softened. "But, do you know, this nobility of mind exists in a
dream, if one may put it so? It never appears in practice or deed. Now,
why is that? I can never understand."

"Do not despair. I think we may say without fear of deceiving ourselves,
that you have now given a fairly exact account of your life. I, at
least, think it would be impossible to add much to what you have just
told me."

"Impossible?" cried Keller, almost pityingly. "Oh prince, how little you
really seem to understand human nature!"

"Is there really much more to be added?" asked the prince, with mild
surprise. "Well, what is it you really want of me? Speak out; tell me
why you came to make your confession to me?"

"What did I want? Well, to begin with, it is good to meet a man like
you. It is a pleasure to talk over my faults with you. I know you for
one of the best of men... and then... then..."

He hesitated, and appeared so much embarrassed that the prince helped
him out.

"Then you wanted me to lend you money?"

The words were spoken in a grave tone, and even somewhat shyly.

Keller started, gave an astonished look at the speaker, and thumped the
table with his fist.

"Well, prince, that's enough to knock me down! It astounds me! Here you
are, as simple and innocent as a knight of the golden age, and yet...
yet... you read a man's soul like a psychologist! Now, do explain it to
me, prince, because I... I really do not understand!... Of course, my
aim was to borrow money all along, and you... you asked the question
as if there was nothing blameable in it--as if you thought it quite
natural."

"Yes... from you it is quite natural."

"And you are not offended?"

"Why should I be offended?"

"Well, just listen, prince. I remained here last evening, partly because
I have a great admiration for the French archbishop Bourdaloue. I
enjoyed a discussion over him till three o'clock in the morning, with
Lebedeff; and then... then--I swear by all I hold sacred that I am
telling you the truth--then I wished to develop my soul in this frank
and heartfelt confession to you. This was my thought as I was sobbing
myself to sleep at dawn. Just as I was losing consciousness, tears in
my soul, tears on my face (I remember how I lay there sobbing), an idea
from hell struck me. 'Why not, after confessing, borrow money from him?'
You see, this confession was a kind of masterstroke; I intended to use
it as a means to your good grace and favour--and then--then I meant to
walk off with a hundred and fifty roubles. Now, do you not call that
base?"

"It is hardly an exact statement of the case," said the prince in reply.
"You have confused your motives and ideas, as I need scarcely say too
often happens to myself. I can assure you, Keller, I reproach myself
bitterly for it sometimes. When you were talking just now I seemed to be
listening to something about myself. At times I have imagined that all
men were the same," he continued earnestly, for he appeared to be much
interested in the conversation, "and that consoled me in a certain
degree, for a _double_ motive is a thing most difficult to fight against.
I have tried, and I know. God knows whence they arise, these ideas that
you speak of as base. I fear these double motives more than ever just
now, but I am not your judge, and in my opinion it is going too far to
give the name of baseness to it--what do you think? You were going
to employ your tears as a ruse in order to borrow money, but you also
say--in fact, you have sworn to the fact--that independently of this
your confession was made with an honourable motive. As for the money,
you want it for drink, do you not? After your confession, that is
weakness, of course; but, after all, how can anyone give up a bad habit
at a moment's notice? It is impossible. What can we do? It is best, I
think, to leave the matter to your own conscience. How does it seem to
you?" As he concluded the prince looked curiously at Keller; evidently
this problem of double motives had often been considered by him before.

"Well, how anybody can call you an idiot after that, is more than I can
understand!" cried the boxer.

The prince reddened slightly.

"Bourdaloue, the archbishop, would not have spared a man like me,"
Keller continued, "but you, you have judged me with humanity. To show
how grateful I am, and as a punishment, I will not accept a hundred and
fifty roubles. Give me twenty-five--that will be enough; it is all I
really need, for a fortnight at least. I will not ask you for more for
a fortnight. I should like to have given Agatha a present, but she does
not really deserve it. Oh, my dear prince, God bless you!"

At this moment Lebedeff appeared, having just arrived from Petersburg.
He frowned when he saw the twenty-five rouble note in Keller's hand, but
the latter, having got the money, went away at once. Lebedeff began to
abuse him.

"You are unjust; I found him sincerely repentant," observed the prince,
after listening for a time.

"What is the good of repentance like that? It is the same exactly as
mine yesterday, when I said, 'I am base, I am base,'--words, and nothing
more!"

"Then they were only words on your part? I thought, on the contrary..."

"Well, I don't mind telling you the truth--you only! Because you see
through a man somehow. Words and actions, truth and falsehood, are all
jumbled up together in me, and yet I am perfectly sincere. I feel the
deepest repentance, believe it or not, as you choose; but words and lies
come out in the infernal craving to get the better of other people.
It is always there--the notion of cheating people, and of using my
repentant tears to my own advantage! I assure you this is the truth,
prince! I would not tell any other man for the world! He would laugh and
jeer at me--but you, you judge a man humanely."

"Why, Keller said the same thing to me nearly word for word a few
minutes ago!" cried Muishkin. "And you both seem inclined to boast about
it! You astonish me, but I think he is more sincere than you, for you
make a regular trade of it. Oh, don't put on that pathetic expression,
and don't put your hand on your heart! Have you anything to say to me?
You have not come for nothing..."

Lebedeff grinned and wriggled.

"I have been waiting all day for you, because I want to ask you a
question; and, for once in your life, please tell me the truth at once.
Had you anything to do with that affair of the carriage yesterday?"

Lebedeff began to grin again, rubbed his hands, sneezed, but spoke not a
word in reply.

"I see you had something to do with it."

"Indirectly, quite indirectly! I am speaking the truth--I am indeed!
I merely told a certain person that I had people in my house, and that
such and such personages might be found among them."

"I am aware that you sent your son to that house--he told me so himself
just now, but what is this intrigue?" said the prince, impatiently.

"It is not my intrigue!" cried Lebedeff, waving his hand.

"It was engineered by other people, and is, properly speaking, rather a
fantasy than an intrigue!"

"But what is it all about? Tell me, for Heaven's sake! Cannot you
understand how nearly it touches me? Why are they blackening Evgenie
Pavlovitch's reputation?"

Lebedeff grimaced and wriggled again.

"Prince!" said he. "Excellency! You won't let me tell you the whole
truth; I have tried to explain; more than once I have begun, but you
have not allowed me to go on..."

The prince gave no answer, and sat deep in thought. Evidently he was
struggling to decide.

"Very well! Tell me the truth," he said, dejectedly.

"Aglaya Ivanovna..." began Lebedeff, promptly.

"Be silent! At once!" interrupted the prince, red with indignation, and
perhaps with shame, too. "It is impossible and absurd! All that has been
invented by you, or fools like you! Let me never hear you say a word
again on that subject!"

Late in the evening Colia came in with a whole budget of Petersburg and
Pavlofsk news. He did not dwell much on the Petersburg part of it, which
consisted chiefly of intelligence about his friend Hippolyte, but passed
quickly to the Pavlofsk tidings. He had gone straight to the Epanchins'
from the station.

"There's the deuce and all going on there!" he said. "First of all about
the row last night, and I think there must be something new as well,
though I didn't like to ask. Not a word about _you_, prince, the whole
time! The most interesting fact was that Aglaya had been quarrelling
with her people about Gania. Colia did not know any details, except that
it had been a terrible quarrel! Also Evgenie Pavlovitch had called, and
met with an excellent reception all round. And another curious thing:
Mrs. Epanchin was so angry that she called Varia to her--Varia was
talking to the girls--and turned her out of the house 'once for all' she
said. I heard it from Varia herself--Mrs. Epanchin was quite polite,
but firm; and when Varia said good-bye to the girls, she told them
nothing about it, and they didn't know they were saying goodbye for the
last time. I'm sorry for Varia, and for Gania too; he isn't half a bad
fellow, in spite of his faults, and I shall never forgive myself for not
liking him before! I don't know whether I ought to continue to go to the
Epanchins' now," concluded Colia--"I like to be quite independent of
others, and of other people's quarrels if I can; but I must think over
it."

"I don't think you need break your heart over Gania," said the prince;
"for if what you say is true, he must be considered dangerous in the
Epanchin household, and if so, certain hopes of his must have been
encouraged."

"What? What hopes?" cried Colia; "you surely don't mean Aglaya?--oh,
no!--"

"You're a dreadful sceptic, prince," he continued, after a moment's
silence. "I have observed of late that you have grown sceptical about
everything. You don't seem to believe in people as you did, and are
always attributing motives and so on--am I using the word 'sceptic' in
its proper sense?"

"I believe so; but I'm not sure."

"Well, I'll change it, right or wrong; I'll say that you are not
sceptical, but _jealous_. There! you are deadly jealous of Gania, over
a certain proud damsel! Come!" Colia jumped up, with these words, and
burst out laughing. He laughed as he had perhaps never laughed before,
and still more when he saw the prince flushing up to his temples. He was
delighted that the prince should be jealous about Aglaya. However, he
stopped immediately on seeing that the other was really hurt, and the
conversation continued, very earnestly, for an hour or more.

Next day the prince had to go to town, on business. Returning in the
afternoon, he happened upon General Epanchin at the station. The latter
seized his hand, glancing around nervously, as if he were afraid
of being caught in wrong-doing, and dragged him into a first-class
compartment. He was burning to speak about something of importance.

"In the first place, my dear prince, don't be angry with me. I would
have come to see you yesterday, but I didn't know how Lizabetha
Prokofievna would take it. My dear fellow, my house is simply a hell
just now, a sort of sphinx has taken up its abode there. We live in an
atmosphere of riddles; I can't make head or tail of anything. As for
you, I feel sure you are the least to blame of any of us, though you
certainly have been the cause of a good deal of trouble. You see, it's
all very pleasant to be a philanthropist; but it can be carried too far.
Of course I admire kind-heartedness, and I esteem my wife, but--"

The general wandered on in this disconnected way for a long time; it
was clear that he was much disturbed by some circumstance which he could
make nothing of.

"It is plain to me, that _you_ are not in it at all," he continued, at
last, a little less vaguely, "but perhaps you had better not come to
our house for a little while. I ask you in the friendliest manner,
mind; just till the wind changes again. As for Evgenie Pavlovitch," he
continued with some excitement, "the whole thing is a calumny, a dirty
calumny. It is simply a plot, an intrigue, to upset our plans and to
stir up a quarrel. You see, prince, I'll tell you privately, Evgenie and
ourselves have not said a word yet, we have no formal understanding, we
are in no way bound on either side, but the word may be said very soon,
don't you see, _very_ soon, and all this is most injurious, and is meant
to be so. Why? I'm sure I can't tell you. She's an extraordinary woman,
you see, an eccentric woman; I tell you I am so frightened of that woman
that I can't sleep. What a carriage that was, and where did it come
from, eh? I declare, I was base enough to suspect Evgenie at first; but
it seems certain that that cannot be the case, and if so, why is she
interfering here? That's the riddle, what does she want? Is it to keep
Evgenie to herself? But, my dear fellow, I swear to you, I swear he
doesn't even _know_ her, and as for those bills, why, the whole thing is
an invention! And the familiarity of the woman! It's quite clear we must
treat the impudent creature's attempt with disdain, and redouble our
courtesy towards Evgenie. I told my wife so.

"Now I'll tell you my secret conviction. I'm certain that she's doing
this to revenge herself on me, on account of the past, though I assure
you that all the time I was blameless. I blush at the very idea. And
now she turns up again like this, when I thought she had finally
disappeared! Where's Rogojin all this time? I thought she was Mrs.
Rogojin, long ago."

The old man was in a state of great mental perturbation. The whole of
the journey, which occupied nearly an hour, he continued in this strain,
putting questions and answering them himself, shrugging his shoulders,
pressing the prince's hand, and assuring the latter that, at all
events, he had no suspicion whatever of _him_. This last assurance was
satisfactory, at all events. The general finished by informing him that
Evgenie's uncle was head of one of the civil service departments, and
rich, very rich, and a gourmand. "And, well, Heaven preserve him, of
course--but Evgenie gets his money, don't you see? But, for all this,
I'm uncomfortable, I don't know why. There's something in the air, I
feel there's something nasty in the air, like a bat, and I'm by no means
comfortable."

And it was not until the third day that the formal reconciliation
between the prince and the Epanchins took place, as said before.

XII.

It was seven in the evening, and the prince was just preparing to go
out for a walk in the park, when suddenly Mrs. Epanchin appeared on the
terrace.

"In the first place, don't dare to suppose," she began, "that I am going
to apologize. Nonsense! You were entirely to blame."

The prince remained silent.

"Were you to blame, or not?"

"No, certainly not, no more than yourself, though at first I thought I
was."

"Oh, very well, let's sit down, at all events, for I don't intend to
stand up all day. And remember, if you say, one word about 'mischievous
urchins,' I shall go away and break with you altogether. Now then, did
you, or did you not, send a letter to Aglaya, a couple of months or so
ago, about Easter-tide?"

"Yes!"

"What for? What was your object? Show me the letter." Mrs. Epanchin's
eyes flashed; she was almost trembling with impatience.

"I have not got the letter," said the prince, timidly, extremely
surprised at the turn the conversation had taken. "If anyone has it, if
it still exists, Aglaya Ivanovna must have it."

"No finessing, please. What did you write about?"

"I am not finessing, and I am not in the least afraid of telling you;
but I don't see the slightest reason why I should not have written."

"Be quiet, you can talk afterwards! What was the letter about? Why are
you blushing?"

The prince was silent. At last he spoke.

"I don't understand your thoughts, Lizabetha Prokofievna; but I can see
that the fact of my having written is for some reason repugnant to you.
You must admit that I have a perfect right to refuse to answer your
questions; but, in order to show you that I am neither ashamed of
the letter, nor sorry that I wrote it, and that I am not in the least
inclined to blush about it" (here the prince's blushes redoubled), "I
will repeat the substance of my letter, for I think I know it almost by
heart."

So saying, the prince repeated the letter almost word for word, as he
had written it.

"My goodness, what utter twaddle, and what may all this nonsense have
signified, pray? If it had any meaning at all!" said Mrs. Epanchin,
cuttingly, after having listened with great attention.

"I really don't absolutely know myself; I know my feeling was very
sincere. I had moments at that time full of life and hope."

"What sort of hope?"

"It is difficult to explain, but certainly not the hopes you have in
your mind. Hopes--well, in a word, hopes for the future, and a feeling
of joy that _there_, at all events, I was not entirely a stranger and a
foreigner. I felt an ecstasy in being in my native land once more; and
one sunny morning I took up a pen and wrote her that letter, but why to
_her_, I don't quite know. Sometimes one longs to have a friend near, and
I evidently felt the need of one then," added the prince, and paused.

"Are you in love with her?"

"N-no! I wrote to her as to a sister; I signed myself her brother."

"Oh yes, of course, on purpose! I quite understand."

"It is very painful to me to answer these questions, Lizabetha
Prokofievna."

"I dare say it is; but that's no affair of mine. Now then, assure me
truly as before Heaven, are you lying to me or not?"

"No, I am not lying."

"Are you telling the truth when you say you are not in love?"

"I believe it is the absolute truth."

"'I believe,' indeed! Did that mischievous urchin give it to her?"

"I asked Nicolai Ardalionovitch..."

"The urchin! the urchin!" interrupted Lizabetha Prokofievna in an angry
voice. "I do not want to know if it were Nicolai Ardalionovitch! The
urchin!"

"Nicolai Ardalionovitch..."

"The urchin, I tell you!"

"No, it was not the urchin: it was Nicolai Ardalionovitch," said the
prince very firmly, but without raising his voice.

"Well, all right! All right, my dear! I shall put that down to your
account."

She was silent a moment to get breath, and to recover her composure.

"Well!--and what's the meaning of the 'poor knight,' eh?"

"I don't know in the least; I wasn't present when the joke was made. It
_is_ a joke. I suppose, and that's all."

"Well, that's a comfort, at all events. You don't suppose she could take
any interest in you, do you? Why, she called you an 'idiot' herself."

"I think you might have spared me that," murmured the prince
reproachfully, almost in a whisper.

"Don't be angry; she is a wilful, mad, spoilt girl. If she likes a
person she will pitch into him, and chaff him. I used to be just such
another. But for all that you needn't flatter yourself, my boy; she is
not for you. I don't believe it, and it is not to be. I tell you so at
once, so that you may take proper precautions. Now, I want to hear you
swear that you are not married to that woman?"

"Lizabetha Prokofievna, what are you thinking of?" cried the prince,
almost leaping to his feet in amazement.

"Why? You very nearly were, anyhow."

"Yes--I nearly was," whispered the prince, hanging his head.

"Well then, have you come here for _her?_ Are you in love with _her?_
With _that_ creature?"

"I did not come to marry at all," replied the prince.

"Is there anything you hold sacred?"

"There is."

"Then swear by it that you did not come here to marry _her!_"

"I'll swear it by whatever you please."

"I believe you. You may kiss me; I breathe freely at last. But you must
know, my dear friend, Aglaya does not love you, and she shall never be
your wife while I am out of my grave. So be warned in time. Do you hear
me?"

"Yes, I hear."

The prince flushed up so much that he could not look her in the face.

"I have waited for you with the greatest impatience (not that you were
worth it). Every night I have drenched my pillow with tears, not for
you, my friend, not for you, don't flatter yourself! I have my own
grief, always the same, always the same. But I'll tell you why I have
been awaiting you so impatiently, because I believe that Providence
itself sent you to be a friend and a brother to me. I haven't a friend
in the world except Princess Bielokonski, and she is growing as stupid
as a sheep from old age. Now then, tell me, yes or no? Do you know why
she called out from her carriage the other night?"

"I give you my word of honour that I had nothing to do with the matter
and know nothing about it."

"Very well, I believe you. I have my own ideas about it. Up to yesterday
morning I thought it was really Evgenie Pavlovitch who was to blame; now
I cannot help agreeing with the others. But why he was made such a fool
of I cannot understand. However, he is not going to marry Aglaya, I can
tell you that. He may be a very excellent fellow, but--so it shall be.
I was not at all sure of accepting him before, but now I have quite made
up my mind that I won't have him. 'Put me in my coffin first and then
into my grave, and then you may marry my daughter to whomsoever you
please,' so I said to the general this very morning. You see how I trust
you, my boy."

"Yes, I see and understand."

Mrs. Epanchin gazed keenly into the prince's eyes. She was anxious to
see what impression the news as to Evgenie Pavlovitch had made upon him.

"Do you know anything about Gavrila Ardalionovitch?" she asked at last.

"Oh yes, I know a good deal."

"Did you know he had communications with Aglaya?"

"No, I didn't," said the prince, trembling a little, and in great
agitation. "You say Gavrila Ardalionovitch has private communications
with Aglaya?--Impossible!"

"Only quite lately. His sister has been working like a rat to clear the
way for him all the winter."

"I don't believe it!" said the prince abruptly, after a short pause.
"Had it been so I should have known long ago."

"Oh, of course, yes; he would have come and wept out his secret on your
bosom. Oh, you simpleton--you simpleton! Anyone can deceive you and take
you in like a--like a,--aren't you ashamed to trust him? Can't you see
that he humbugs you just as much as ever he pleases?"

"I know very well that he does deceive me occasionally, and he knows
that I know it, but--" The prince did not finish his sentence.

"And that's why you trust him, eh? So I should have supposed. Good Lord,
was there ever such a man as you? Tfu! and are you aware, sir, that this
Gania, or his sister Varia, have brought her into correspondence with
Nastasia Philipovna?"

"Brought whom?" cried Muishkin.

"Aglaya."

"I don't believe it! It's impossible! What object could they have?" He
jumped up from his chair in his excitement.

"Nor do I believe it, in spite of the proofs. The girl is self-willed
and fantastic, and insane! She's wicked, wicked! I'll repeat it for
a thousand years that she's wicked; they _all_ are, just now, all my
daughters, even that 'wet hen' Alexandra. And yet I don't believe it.
Because I don't choose to believe it, perhaps; but I don't. Why haven't
you been?" she turned on the prince suddenly. "Why didn't you come near
us all these three days, eh?"

The prince began to give his reasons, but she interrupted him again.

"Everybody takes you in and deceives you; you went to town yesterday. I
dare swear you went down on your knees to that rogue, and begged him to
accept your ten thousand roubles!"

"I never thought of doing any such thing. I have not seen him, and he is
not a rogue, in my opinion. I have had a letter from him."

"Show it me!"

The prince took a paper from his pocket-book, and handed it to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. It ran as follows:


"SIR,

"In the eyes of the world I am sure that I have no cause for pride or
self-esteem. I am much too insignificant for that. But what may be so to
other men's eyes is not so to yours. I am convinced that you are better
than other people. Doktorenko disagrees with me, but I am content to
differ from him on this point. I will never accept one single copeck
from you, but you have helped my mother, and I am bound to be grateful
to you for that, however weak it may seem. At any rate, I have changed
my opinion about you, and I think right to inform you of the fact; but I
also suppose that there can be no further inter course between us.

"ANTIP BURDOVSKY.

"P.S.--The two hundred roubles I owe you shall certainly be repaid in
time."


"How extremely stupid!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, giving back the letter
abruptly. "It was not worth the trouble of reading. Why are you
smiling?"

"Confess that you are pleased to have read it."

"What! Pleased with all that nonsense! Why, cannot you see that they are
all infatuated with pride and vanity?"

"He has acknowledged himself to be in the wrong. Don't you see that the
greater his vanity, the more difficult this admission must have been on
his part? Oh, what a little child you are, Lizabetha Prokofievna!"

"Are you tempting me to box your ears for you, or what?"

"Not at all. I am only proving that you are glad about the letter. Why
conceal your real feelings? You always like to do it."

"Never come near my house again!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, pale with rage.
"Don't let me see as much as a _shadow_ of you about the place! Do you
hear?"

"Oh yes, and in three days you'll come and invite me yourself. Aren't
you ashamed now? These are your best feelings; you are only tormenting
yourself."

"I'll die before I invite you! I shall forget your very name! I've
forgotten it already!"

She marched towards the door.

"But I'm forbidden your house as it is, without your added threats!"
cried the prince after her.

"What? Who forbade you?"

She turned round so suddenly that one might have supposed a needle had
been stuck into her.

The prince hesitated. He perceived that he had said too much now.

"_Who_ forbade you?" cried Mrs. Epanchin once more.

"Aglaya Ivanovna told me--"

"When? Speak--quick!"

"She sent to say, yesterday morning, that I was never to dare to come
near the house again."

Lizabetha Prokofievna stood like a stone.

"What did she send? Whom? Was it that boy? Was it a message?-quick!"

"I had a note," said the prince.

"Where is it? Give it here, at once."

The prince thought a moment. Then he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket
an untidy slip of paper, on which was scrawled:


"PRINCE LEF NICOLAIEVITCH,--If you think fit, after all that has passed,
to honour our house with a visit, I can assure you you will not find me
among the number of those who are in any way delighted to see you.

"AGLAYA EPANCHIN."


Mrs. Epanchin reflected a moment. The next minute she flew at the
prince, seized his hand, and dragged him after her to the door.

"Quick--come along!" she cried, breathless with agitation and
impatience. "Come along with me this moment!"

"But you declared I wasn't--"

"Don't be a simpleton. You behave just as though you weren't a man at
all. Come on! I shall see, now, with my own eyes. I shall see all."

"Well, let me get my hat, at least."

"Here's your miserable hat. He couldn't even choose a respectable shape
for his hat! Come on! She did that because I took your part and said you
ought to have come--little vixen!--else she would never have sent you
that silly note. It's a most improper note, I call it; most improper for
such an intelligent, well-brought-up girl to write. H'm! I dare say she
was annoyed that you didn't come; but she ought to have known that one
can't write like that to an idiot like you, for you'd be sure to take it
literally." Mrs. Epanchin was dragging the prince along with her all
the time, and never let go of his hand for an instant. "What are you
listening for?" she added, seeing that she had committed herself a
little. "She wants a clown like you--she hasn't seen one for some
time--to play with. That's why she is anxious for you to come to the
house. And right glad I am that she'll make a thorough good fool of you.
You deserve it; and she can do it--oh! she can, indeed!--as well as most
people."




PART III

I.

The Epanchin family, or at least the more serious members of it, were
sometimes grieved because they seemed so unlike the rest of the world.
They were not quite certain, but had at times a strong suspicion that
things did not happen to them as they did to other people. Others led a
quiet, uneventful life, while they were subject to continual upheavals.
Others kept on the rails without difficulty; they ran off at the
slightest obstacle. Other houses were governed by a timid routine;
theirs was somehow different. Perhaps Lizabetha Prokofievna was alone
in making these fretful observations; the girls, though not wanting in
intelligence, were still young; the general was intelligent, too, but
narrow, and in any difficulty he was content to say, "H'm!" and leave
the matter to his wife. Consequently, on her fell the responsibility. It
was not that they distinguished themselves as a family by any particular
originality, or that their excursions off the track led to any breach of
the proprieties. Oh no.

There was nothing premeditated, there was not even any conscious purpose
in it all, and yet, in spite of everything, the family, although highly
respected, was not quite what every highly respected family ought to be.
For a long time now Lizabetha Prokofievna had had it in her mind that
all the trouble was owing to her "unfortunate character," and this
added to her distress. She blamed her own stupid unconventional
"eccentricity." Always restless, always on the go, she constantly seemed
to lose her way, and to get into trouble over the simplest and more
ordinary affairs of life.

We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked
and esteemed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan
Fedorovitch himself was received everywhere with respect. He deserved
this, partly on account of his wealth and position, partly because,
though limited, he was really a very good fellow. But a certain
limitation of mind seems to be an indispensable asset, if not to all
public personages, at least to all serious financiers. Added to this,
his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when to be silent, yet
never allowed himself to be trampled upon. Also--and this was more
important than all--he had the advantage of being under exalted
patronage.

As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an
aristocratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends
than of birth, but she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by
people of consequence in society, whose example in receiving her was
therefore followed by others. It seems hardly necessary to remark that
her family worries and anxieties had little or no foundation, or that
her imagination increased them to an absurd degree; but if you have a
wart on your forehead or nose, you imagine that all the world is looking
at it, and that people would make fun of you because of it, even if you
had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha Prokofievna was considered
"eccentric" in society, but she was none the less esteemed: the pity was
that she was ceasing to believe in that esteem. When she thought of
her daughters, she said to herself sorrowfully that she was a hindrance
rather than a help to their future, that her character and temper were
absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. Naturally, she put the blame on her
surroundings, and from morning to night was quarrelling with her husband
and children, whom she really loved to the point of self-sacrifice,
even, one might say, of passion.

She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow
up "eccentric," like herself; she believed that no other society girls
were like them. "They are growing into Nihilists!" she repeated over and
over again. For years she had tormented herself with this idea, and with
the question: "Why don't they get married?"

"It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be
nothing else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas,
that wretched woman's question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to
cut off her magnificent hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing
like it! The scissors were in her hand, and I had to go down on my knees
and implore her... She did it, I know, from sheer mischief, to spite
her mother, for she is a naughty, capricious girl, a real spoiled child
spiteful and mischievous to a degree! And then Alexandra wanted to shave
her head, not from caprice or mischief, but, like a little fool, simply
because Aglaya persuaded her she would sleep better without her hair,
and not suffer from headache! And how many suitors have they not had
during the last five years! Excellent offers, too! What more do they
want? Why don't they get married? For no other reason than to vex their
mother--none--none!"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that
one of her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. "It will be one off our
hands!" she declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with
greater tenderness. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was
therefore approved in society. Prince S. was a distinguished man, he
had money, and his future wife was devoted to him; what more could
be desired? Lizabetha Prokofievna had felt less anxious about this
daughter, however, although she considered her artistic tastes
suspicious. But to make up for them she was, as her mother expressed it,
"merry," and had plenty of "common-sense." It was Aglaya's future which
disturbed her most. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the
mother never quite knew whether there was cause for anxiety or not.
Sometimes she felt as if there was nothing to be expected from her. She
was twenty-five now, and must be fated to be an old maid, and "with such
beauty, too!" The mother spent whole nights in weeping and lamenting,
while all the time the cause of her grief slumbered peacefully. "What is
the matter with her? Is she a Nihilist, or simply a fool?"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the
last question. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna's judgment,
and often consulted her in difficulties; but that she was a 'wet
hen' she never for a moment doubted. "She is so calm; nothing rouses
her--though wet hens are not always calm! Oh! I can't understand
it!" Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of puzzled
compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya's case, though the latter
was her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as
"wet hen" (in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself),
only made Alexandra laugh. Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs.
Epanchin, and drove her into a frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna
liked to sleep late, and was always dreaming, though her dreams had the
peculiarity of being as innocent and naive as those of a child of seven;
and the very innocence of her dreams annoyed her mother. Once she dreamt
of nine hens, and this was the cause of quite a serious quarrel--no
one knew why. Another time she had--it was most unusual--a dream with
a spark of originality in it. She dreamt of a monk in a dark room, into
which she was too frightened to go. Adelaida and Aglaya rushed off with
shrieks of laughter to relate this to their mother, but she was quite
angry, and said her daughters were all fools.

"H'm! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable 'wet hen'! Nothing excites
her; and yet she is not happy; some days it makes one miserable only
to look at her! Why is she unhappy, I wonder?" At times Lizabetha
Prokofievna put this question to her husband, and as usual she spoke
in the threatening tone of one who demands an immediate answer. Ivan
Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and at last give his
opinion: "She needs a husband!"

"God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!" his wife
flashed back. "Or that he should be as gross and churlish as you!"

The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a
while grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually
attentive, gentle, and respectful to her "gross and churlish" husband,
her "dear, kind Ivan Fedorovitch," for she had never left off loving
him. She was even still "in love" with him. He knew it well, and for his
part held her in the greatest esteem.

But the mother's great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. "She is exactly
like me--my image in everything," said Mrs. Epanchin to herself. "A
tyrant! A real little demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless and
mischievous! Good Lord, how unhappy she will be!"

But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida's approaching marriage was
balm to the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.

Adelaida's fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya's was
linked, in society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was "as
good as engaged;" and Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so
well (during this period), that the mother's heart was full of joy. Of
course, Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thoroughly studied first, before
the final step should be taken; but, really, how lovely dear Aglaya had
become--she actually grew more beautiful every day! And then--Yes, and
then--this abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went
topsy-turvy at once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.

What had really happened?

If it had been any other family than the Epanchins', nothing particular
would have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin's invariable fussiness
and anxiety, there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest
matters of everyday life, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful
and alarming consequences, and suffered accordingly.

What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary
anxieties and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw
looming ahead a serious cause for annoyance--something really likely to
arouse doubts and suspicions!

"How dared they, how _dared_ they write that hateful anonymous letter
informing me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia Philipovna?"
she thought, as she dragged the prince along towards her own house,
and again when she sat him down at the round table where the family was
already assembled. "How dared they so much as _think_ of such a thing? I
should _die_ with shame if I thought there was a particle of truth in it,
or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who dares play these
jokes upon _us_, the Epanchins? _Why_ didn't we go to the Yelagin instead
of coming down here? I _told_ you we had better go to the Yelagin this
summer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It's all your fault. I dare say it was that
Varia who sent the letter. It's all Ivan Fedorovitch. _That_ woman is
doing it all for him, I know she is, to show she can make a fool of him
now just as she did when he used to give her pearls.

"But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed
up in it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an
age to be married; they were present, they heard everything there was to
hear. They were mixed up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful
youths. You must be pleased to remember they heard it all. I cannot
forgive that wretched prince. I never shall forgive him! And why, if you
please, has Aglaya had an attack of nerves for these last three
days? Why has she all but quarrelled with her sisters, even with
Alexandra--whom she respects so much that she always kisses her hands as
though she were her mother? What are all these riddles of hers that we
have to guess? What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do with it? Why did
she take upon herself to champion him this morning, and burst into tears
