on their boxes and feather beds under their windows. Part of the male
population were hard at work ruthlessly chopping down fences and even
whole huts which were near the fire and on the windward side. None
were crying except the children, who had been waked out of their sleep,
though the women who had dragged out their chattels were lamenting
in sing-song voices. Those who had not finished their task were still
silent, busily carrying out their goods. Sparks and embers were carried
a long way in all directions. People put them out as best they could.
Some helped to put the fire out while others stood about, admiring it. A
great fire at night always has a thrilling and exhilarating effect.
This is what explains the attraction of fireworks. But in that case the
artistic regularity with which the fire is presented and the complete
lack of danger give an impression of lightness and playfulness like the
effect of a glass of champagne. A real conflagration is a very different
matter. Then the horror and a certain sense of personal danger,
together with the exhilarating effect of a fire at night, produce on the
spectator (though of course not in the householder whose goods are being
burnt) a certain concussion of the brain and, as it were, a challenge to
those destructive instincts which, alas, lie hidden in every heart, even
that of the mildest and most domestic little clerk.... This sinister
sensation is almost always fascinating. "I really don't know whether one
can look at a fire without a certain pleasure." This is word for word
what Stepan Trofimovitch said to me one night on returning home after he
had happened to witness a fire and was still under the influence of the
spectacle. Of course, the very man who enjoys the spectacle will rush
into the fire himself to save a child or an old woman; but that is
altogether a different matter.

Following in the wake of the crowd of sightseers, I succeeded, without
asking questions, in reaching the chief centre of danger, where at last
I saw Lembke, whom I was seeking at Yulia Mihailovna's request. His
position was strange and extraordinary. He was standing on the ruins of
a fence. Thirty paces to the left of him rose the black skeleton of a
two-storied house which had almost burnt out. It had holes instead of
windows at each story, its roof had fallen in, and the flames were still
here and there creeping among the charred beams. At the farther end
of the courtyard, twenty paces away, the lodge, also a two-storied
building, was beginning to burn, and the firemen were doing their utmost
to save it. On the right the firemen and the people were trying to save
a rather large wooden building which was not actually burning, though
it had caught fire several times and was inevitably bound to be burnt in
the end. Lembke stood facing the lodge, shouting and gesticulating. He
was giving orders which no one attempted to carry out. It seemed to me
that every one had given him up as hopeless and left him. Anyway,
though every one in the vast crowd of all classes, among whom there
were gentlemen, and even the cathedral priest, was listening to him
with curiosity and wonder, no one spoke to him or tried to get him away.
Lembke, with a pale face and glittering eyes, was uttering the most
amazing things. To complete the picture, he had lost his hat and was
bareheaded.

"It's all incendiarism! It's nihilism! If anything is burning, it's
nihilism!" I heard almost with horror; and though there was nothing to
be surprised at, yet actual madness, when one sees it, always gives one
a shock.

"Your Excellency," said a policeman, coming up to him, "what if you were
to try the repose of home?... It's dangerous for your Excellency even to
stand here."

This policeman, as I heard afterwards, had been told off by the chief
of police to watch over Andrey Antonovitch, to do his utmost to get him
home, and in case of danger even to use force--a task evidently beyond
the man's power.

"They will wipe away the tears of the people whose houses have been
burnt, but they will burn down the town. It's all the work of four
scoundrels, four and a half! Arrest the scoundrel! He worms himself into
the honour of families. They made use of the governesses to burn down
the houses. It's vile, vile! Aie, what's he about?" he shouted, suddenly
noticing a fireman at the top of the burning lodge, under whom the roof
had almost burnt away and round whom the flames were beginning to flare
up. "Pull him down! Pull him down! He will fall, he will catch fire, put
him out!... What is he doing there?"

"He is putting the fire out, your Excellency."

"Not likely. The fire is in the minds of men and not in the roofs of
houses. Pull him down and give it up! Better give it up, much better!
Let it put itself out. Aie, who is crying now? An old woman! It's an old
woman shouting. Why have they forgotten the old woman?"

There actually was an old woman crying on the ground floor of the
burning lodge. She was an old creature of eighty, a relation of the
shopkeeper who owned the house. But she had not been forgotten; she had
gone back to the burning house while it was still possible, with the
insane idea of rescuing her feather bed from a corner room which was
still untouched. Choking with the smoke and screaming with the heat, for
the room was on fire by the time she reached it, she was still trying
with her decrepit hands to squeeze her feather bed through a broken
window pane. Lembke rushed to her assistance. Every one saw him run up
to the window, catch hold of one corner of the feather bed and try with
all his might to pull it out. As ill luck would have it, a board fell at
that moment from the roof and hit the unhappy governor. It did not
kill him, it merely grazed him on the neck as it fell, but Andrey
Antonovitch's career was over, among us at least; the blow knocked him
off his feet and he sank on the ground unconscious.

The day dawned at last, gloomy and sullen. The fire was abating; the
wind was followed by a sudden calm, and then a fine drizzling rain fell.
I was by that time in another part, some distance from where Lembke had
fallen, and here I overheard very strange conversations in the crowd. A
strange fact had come to light. On the very outskirts of the quarter,
on a piece of waste land beyond the kitchen gardens, not less than fifty
paces from any other buildings, there stood a little wooden house which
had only lately been built, and this solitary house had been on fire at
the very beginning, almost before any other. Even had it burnt down, it
was so far from other houses that no other building in the town could
have caught fire from it, and, vice versa, if the whole riverside
had been burnt to the ground, that house might have remained intact,
whatever the wind had been. It followed that it had caught fire
separately and independently and therefore not accidentally. But the
chief point was that it was not burnt to the ground, and at daybreak
strange things were discovered within it. The owner of this new house,
who lived in the neighbourhood, rushed up as soon as he saw it in flames
and with the help of his neighbours pulled apart a pile of faggots which
had been heaped up by the side wall and set fire to. In this way he
saved the house. But there were lodgers in the house--the captain, who
was well known in the town, his sister, and their elderly servant, and
these three persons--the captain, his sister, and their servant--had
been murdered and apparently robbed in the night. (It was here that the
chief of police had gone while Lembke was rescuing the feather bed.)

By morning the news had spread and an immense crowd of all classes, even
the riverside people who had been burnt out had flocked to the waste
land where the new house stood. It was difficult to get there, so dense
was the crowd. I was told at once that the captain had been found lying
dressed on the bench with his throat cut, and that he must have been
dead drunk when he was killed, so that he had felt nothing, and he had
"bled like a bull"; that his sister Marya Timofeyevna had been "stabbed
all over" with a knife and she was lying on the floor in the doorway, so
that probably she had been awake and had fought and struggled with the
murderer. The servant, who had also probably been awake, had her skull
broken. The owner of the house said that the captain had come to see him
the morning before, and that in his drunken bragging he had shown him a
lot of money, as much as two hundred roubles. The captain's shabby old
green pocket-book was found empty on the floor, but Marya Timofeyevna's
box had not been touched, and the silver setting of the ikon had not
been removed either; the captain's clothes, too, had not been disturbed.
It was evident that the thief had been in a hurry and was a man familiar
with the captain's circumstances, who had come only for money and knew
where it was kept. If the owner of the house had not run up at that
moment the burning faggot stack would certainly have set fire to the
house and "it would have been difficult to find out from the charred
corpses how they had died."

So the story was told. One other fact was added: that the person who
had taken this house for the Lebyadkins was no other than Mr. Stavrogin,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, the son of Varvara Petrovna. He had come
himself to take it and had had much ado to persuade the owner to let
it, as the latter had intended to use it as a tavern; but Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was ready to give any rent he asked and had paid for six
months in advance.

"The fire wasn't an accident," I heard said in the crowd.

But the majority said nothing. People's faces were sullen, but I did
not see signs of much indignation. People persisted, however, in
gossiping about Stavrogin, saying that the murdered woman was his wife;
that on the previous day he had "dishonourably" abducted a young lady
belonging to the best family in the place, the daughter of Madame
Drozdov, and that a complaint was to be lodged against him in
Petersburg; and that his wife had been murdered evidently that he might
marry the young lady. Skvoreshniki was not more than a mile and a half
away, and I remember I wondered whether I should not let them know the
position of affairs. I did not notice, however, that there was anyone
egging the crowd on and I don't want to accuse people falsely, though I
did see and recognised at once in the crowd at the fire two or three
of the rowdy lot I had seen in the refreshment-room. I particularly
remember one thin, tall fellow, a cabinet-maker, as I found out later,
with an emaciated face and a curly head, black as though grimed with
soot. He was not drunk, but in contrast to the gloomy passivity of the
crowd seemed beside himself with excitement. He kept addressing the
people, though I don't remember his words; nothing coherent that he said
was longer than "I say, lads, what do you say to this? Are things to go
on like this?" and so saying he waved his arms.




CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED

FROM THE LARGE BALLROOM of Skvoreshniki (the room in which the last
interview with Varvara Petrovna and Stepan Trofimovitch had taken place)
the fire could be plainly seen. At daybreak, soon after five in the
morning, Liza was standing at the farthest window on the right looking
intently at the fading glow. She was alone in the room. She was wearing
the dress she had worn the day before at the matinée--a very smart light
green dress covered with lace, but crushed and put on carelessly and
with haste. Suddenly noticing that some of the hooks were undone in
front she flushed, hurriedly set it right, snatched up from a chair the
red shawl she had flung down when she came in the day before, and put
it round her neck. Some locks of her luxuriant hair had come loose and
showed below the shawl on her right shoulder. Her face looked weary and
careworn, but her eyes glowed under her frowning brows. She went up to
the window again and pressed her burning forehead against the cold pane.
The door opened and Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch came in.

"I've sent a messenger on horseback," he said. "In ten minutes we shall
hear all about it, meantime the servants say that part of the riverside
quarter has been burnt down, on the right side of the bridge near the
quay. It's been burning since eleven o'clock; now the fire is going
down."

He did not go near the window, but stood three steps behind her; she did
not turn towards him.

"It ought to have been light an hour ago by the calendar, and it's still
almost night," she said irritably.

"'Calendars always tell lies,'" he observed with a polite smile, but,
a little ashamed; he made haste to add: "It's dull to live by the
calendar, Liza."

And he relapsed into silence, vexed at the ineptitude of the second
sentence. Liza gave a wry smile.

"You are in such a melancholy mood that you cannot even find words to
speak to me. But you need not trouble, there's a point in what you said.
I always live by the calendar. Every step I take is regulated by the
calendar. Does that surprise you?"

She turned quickly from the window and sat down in a low chair.

"You sit down, too, please. We haven't long to be together and I want to
say anything I like.... Why shouldn't you, too, say anything you like?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat beside her and softly, almost timidly took
her hand.

"What's the meaning of this tone, Liza? Where has it suddenly sprung
from? What do you mean by 'we haven't long to be together'? That's the
second mysterious phrase since you waked, half an hour ago."

"You are beginning to reckon up my mysterious phrases!" she laughed.
"Do you remember I told you I was a dead woman when I came in yesterday?
That you thought fit to forget. To forget or not to notice."

"I don't remember, Liza. Why dead? You must live."

"And is that all? You've quite lost your flow of words. I've lived my
hour and that's enough. Do you remember Christopher Ivanovitch?"

"No I don't," he answered, frowning.

"Christopher Ivanovitch at Lausanne? He bored you dreadfully. He always
used to open the door and say, 'I've come for one minute,' and then stay
the whole day. I don't want to be like Christopher Ivanovitch and stay
the whole day." A look of pain came into his face.

"Liza, it grieves me, this unnatural language. This affectation must
hurt you, too. What's it for? What's the object of it?"

His eyes glowed.

"Liza," he cried, "I swear I love you now more than yesterday when you
came to me!"

"What a strange declaration! Why bring in yesterday and to-day and these
comparisons?"

"You won't leave me," he went on, almost with despair; "we will go away
together, to-day, won't we? Won't we?"

"Aie, don't squeeze my hand so painfully! Where could we go together
to-day? To 'rise again' somewhere? No, we've made experiments enough...
and it's too slow for me; and I am not fit for it; it's too exalted
for me. If we are to go, let it be to Moscow, to pay visits and
entertain--that's my ideal you know; even in Switzerland I didn't
disguise from you what I was like. As we can't go to Moscow and pay
visits since you are married, it's no use talking of that."

"Liza! What happened yesterday!"

"What happened is over!"

"That's impossible! That's cruel!"

"What if it is cruel? You must bear it if it is cruel."

"You are avenging yourself on me for yesterday's caprice," he muttered
with an angry smile. Liza flushed.

"What a mean thought!"

"Why then did you bestow on me... so great a happiness? Have I the right
to know?"

"No, you must manage without rights; don't aggravate the meanness of
your supposition by stupidity. You are not lucky to-day. By the way, you
surely can't be afraid of public opinion and that you will be blamed
for this 'great happiness'? If that's it, for God's sake don't alarm
yourself. It's not your doing at all and you are not responsible to
anyone. When I opened your door yesterday, you didn't even know who was
coming in. It was simply my caprice, as you expressed it just now,
and nothing more! You can look every one in the face boldly and
triumphantly!"

"Your words, that laugh, have been making me feel cold with horror for
the last hour. That 'happiness' of which you speak frantically is
worth... everything to me. How can I lose you now? I swear I loved you
less yesterday. Why are you taking everything from me to-day? Do you
know what it has cost me, this new hope? I've paid for it with life."

"Your own life or another's?"

He got up quickly.

"What does that mean?" he brought out, looking at her steadily.

"Have you paid for it with your life or with mine? is what I mean. Or
have you lost all power of understanding?" cried Liza, flushing. "Why
did you start up so suddenly? Why do you stare at me with such a look?
You frighten me. What is it you are afraid of all the time? I noticed
some time ago that you were afraid and you are now, this very minute...
Good heavens, how pale you are!"

"If you know anything, Liza, I swear I don't... and I wasn't talking of
_that_ just now when I said that I had paid for it with life...."

"I don't understand you," she brought out, faltering apprehensively.

At last a slow brooding smile came on to his lips. He slowly sat down,
put his elbows on his knees, and covered his face with his hands.

"A bad dream and delirium.... We were talking of two different things."

"I don't know what you were talking about.... Do you mean to say you did
not know yesterday that I should leave you to-day, did you know or not?
Don't tell a lie, did you or not?"

"I did," he said softly.

"Well then, what would you have? You knew and yet you accepted 'that
moment' for yourself. Aren't we quits?"

"Tell me the whole truth," he cried in intense distress. "When you
opened my door yesterday, did you know yourself that it was only for one
hour?"

She looked at him with hatred.

"Really, the most sensible person can ask most amazing questions. And
why are you so uneasy? Can it be vanity that a woman should leave you
first instead of your leaving her? Do you know, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
since I've been with you I've discovered that you are very generous to
me, and it's just that I can't endure from you."

He got up from his seat and took a few steps about the room.

"Very well, perhaps it was bound to end so.... But how can it all have
happened?"

"That's a question to worry about! Especially as you know the answer
yourself perfectly well, and understand it better than anyone on earth,
and were counting on it yourself. I am a young lady, my heart has been
trained on the opera, that's how it all began, that's the solution."

"No."

"There is nothing in it to fret your vanity. It is all the absolute
truth. It began with a fine moment which was too much for me to bear.
The day before yesterday, when I 'insulted' you before every one and you
answered me so chivalrously, I went home and guessed at once that
you were running away from me because you were married, and not from
contempt for me which, as a fashionable young lady, I dreaded more than
anything. I understood that it was for my sake, for me, mad as I was,
that you ran away. You see how I appreciate your generosity. Then Pyotr
Stepanovitch skipped up to me and explained it all to me at once. He
revealed to me that you were dominated by a 'great idea,' before which
he and I were as nothing, but yet that I was a stumbling-block in your
path. He brought himself in, he insisted that we three should work
together, and said the most fantastic things about a boat and about
maple-wood oars out of some Russian song. I complimented him and told
him he was a poet, which he swallowed as the real thing. And as apart
from him I had known long before that I had not the strength to do
anything for long, I made up my mind on the spot. Well, that's all and
quite enough, and please let us have no more explanations. We might
quarrel. Don't be afraid of anyone, I take it all on myself. I am horrid
and capricious, I was fascinated by that operatic boat, I am a young
lady... but you know I did think that you were dreadfully in love
with me. Don't despise the poor fool, and don't laugh at the tear that
dropped just now. I am awfully given to crying with self-pity. Come,
that's enough, that's enough. I am no good for anything and you are
no good for anything; it's as bad for both of us, so let's comfort
ourselves with that. Anyway, it eases our vanity."

"Dream and delirium," cried Stavrogin, wringing his hands, and pacing
about the room. "Liza, poor child, what have you done to yourself?"

"I've burnt myself in a candle, nothing more. Surely you are not crying,
too? You should show less feeling and better breeding...."

"Why, why did you come to me?"

"Don't you understand what a ludicrous position you put yourself in in
the eyes of the world by asking such questions?"

"Why have you ruined yourself, so grotesquely and so stupidly, and
what's to be done now?"

"And this is Stavrogin, 'the vampire Stavrogin,' as you are called by a
lady here who is in love with you! Listen! I have told you already, I've
put all my life into one hour and I am at peace. Do the same with
yours... though you've no need to: you have plenty of 'hours' and
'moments' of all sorts before you."

"As many as you; I give you my solemn word, not one hour more than you!"

He was still walking up and down and did not see the rapid penetrating
glance she turned upon him, in which there seemed a dawning hope. But
the light died away at the same moment.

"If you knew what it costs me that I can't be sincere at this moment,
Liza, if I could only tell you..."

"Tell me? You want to tell me something, to me? God save me from your
secrets!" she broke in almost in terror. He stopped and waited uneasily.

"I ought to confess that ever since those days in Switzerland I have
had a strong feeling that you have something awful, loathsome, some
bloodshed on your conscience... and yet something that would make you
look very ridiculous. Beware of telling me, if it's true: I shall laugh
you to scorn. I shall laugh at you for the rest of your life.... Aie,
you are turning pale again? I won't, I won't, I'll go at once." She
jumped up from her chair with a movement of disgust and contempt.

"Torture me, punish me, vent your spite on me," he cried in despair.
"You have the full right. I knew I did not love you and yet I ruined
you! Yes, I accepted the moment for my own; I had a hope... I've had
it a long time... my last hope.... I could not resist the radiance that
flooded my heart when you came in to me yesterday, of yourself, alone,
of your own accord. I suddenly believed.... Perhaps I have faith in it
still."

"I will repay such noble frankness by being as frank. I don't want to be
a Sister of Mercy for you. Perhaps I really may become a nurse unless I
happen appropriately to die to-day; but if I do I won't be your nurse,
though, of course, you need one as much as any crippled creature. I
always fancied that you would take me to some place where there was a
huge wicked spider, big as a man, and we should spend our lives looking
at it and being afraid of it. That's how our love would spend itself.
Appeal to Dashenka; she will go with you anywhere you like."

"Can't you help thinking of her even now?"

"Poor little spaniel! Give her my greetings. Does she know that even in
Switzerland you had fixed on her for your old age? What prudence! What
foresight! Aie, who's that?"

At the farther end of the room a door opened a crack; a head was thrust
in and vanished again hurriedly.

"Is that you, Alexey Yegorytch?" asked Stavrogin.

"No, it's only I." Pyotr Stepanovitch thrust himself half in again.
"How do you do, Lizaveta Nikolaevna? Good morning, anyway. I guessed I
should find you both in this room. I have come for one moment literally,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. I was anxious to have a couple of words with
you at all costs... absolutely necessary... only a few words!"

Stavrogin moved towards him but turned back to Liza at the third step.

"If you hear anything directly, Liza, let me tell you I am to blame for
it!"

She started and looked at him in dismay; but he hurriedly went out.

II

The room from which Pyotr Stepanovitch had peeped in was a large
oval vestibule. Alexey Yegorytch had been sitting there before Pyotr
Stepanovitch came in, but the latter sent him away. Stavrogin closed the
door after him and stood expectant. Pyotr Stepanovitch looked rapidly
and searchingly at him.

"Well?"

"If you know already," said Pyotr Stepanovitch hurriedly, his eyes
looking as though they would dive into Stavrogin's soul, "then, of
course, we are none of us to blame, above all not you, for it's such a
concatenation... such a coincidence of events... in brief, you can't be
legally implicated and I've rushed here to tell you so beforehand."

"Have they been burnt? murdered?"

"Murdered but not burnt, that's the trouble, but I give you my word of
honour that it's not been my fault, however much you may suspect me,
eh? Do you want the whole truth: you see the idea really did cross my
mind--you hinted it yourself, not seriously, but teasing me (for, of
course, you would not hint it seriously), but I couldn't bring myself
to it, and wouldn't bring myself to it for anything, not for a hundred
roubles--and what was there to be gained by it, I mean for me, for
me...." (He was in desperate haste and his talk was like the clacking of a
rattle.) "But what a coincidence of circumstances: I gave that drunken
fool Lebyadkin two hundred and thirty roubles of my own money (do you
hear, my own money, there wasn't a rouble of yours and, what's more, you
know it yourself) the day before yesterday, in the evening--do you hear,
not yesterday after the matinée, but the day before yesterday, make a
note of it: it's a very important coincidence for I did not know for
certain at that time whether Lizaveta Nikolaevna would come to you or
not; I gave my own money simply because you distinguished yourself by
taking it into your head to betray your secret to every one. Well, I
won't go into that... that's your affair... your chivalry, but I must
own I was amazed, it was a knock-down blow. And forasmuch as I was
exceeding weary of these tragic stories--and let me tell you, I talk
seriously though I do use Biblical language--as it was all upsetting
my plans in fact, I made up my mind at any cost, and without your
knowledge, to pack the Lebyadkins off to Petersburg, especially as he
was set on going himself. I made one mistake: I gave the money in your
name;--was it a mistake or not? Perhaps it wasn't a mistake, eh? Listen
now, listen how it has all turned out...."

In the heat of his talk he went close up to Stavrogin and took hold of
the revers of his coat (really, it may have been on purpose). With a
violent movement Stavrogin struck him on the arm.

"Come, what is it... give over... you'll break my arm... what matters
is the way things have turned out," he rattled on, not in the least
surprised at the blow. "I forked out the money in the evening on
condition that his sister and he should set off early next morning; I
trusted that rascal Liputin with the job of getting them into the train
and seeing them off. But that beast Liputin wanted to play his schoolboy
pranks on the public--perhaps you heard? At the matinée? Listen, listen:
they both got drunk, made up verses of which half are Liputin's; he
rigged Lebyadkin out in a dress-coat, assuring me meanwhile that he had
packed him off that morning, but he kept him shut somewhere in a back
room, till he thrust him on the platform at the matinée. But Lebyadkin
got drunk quickly and unexpectedly. Then came the scandalous scene you
know of, and then they got him home more dead than alive, and Liputin
filched away the two hundred roubles, leaving him only small change. But
it appears unluckily that already that morning Lebyadkin had taken that
two hundred roubles out of his pocket, boasted of it and shown it in
undesirable quarters. And as that was just what Fedka was expecting, and
as he had heard something at Kirillov's (do you remember, your hint?) he
made up his mind to take advantage of it. That's the whole truth. I
am glad, anyway, that Fedka did not find the money, the rascal was
reckoning on a thousand, you know! He was in a hurry and seems to have
been frightened by the fire himself.... Would you believe it, that fire
came as a thunderbolt for me. Devil only knows what to make of it! It is
taking things into their own hands.... You see, as I expect so much of
you I will hide nothing from you: I've long been hatching this idea of a
fire because it suits the national and popular taste; but I was keeping
it for a critical moment, for that precious time when we should all rise
up and... And they suddenly took it into their heads to do it, on their
own initiative, without orders, now at the very moment when we ought to
be lying low and keeping quiet! Such presumption!... The fact is, I've
not got to the bottom of it yet, they talk about two Shpigulin men, but
if there are any of _our_ fellows in it, if any one of them has had a hand
in it--so much the worse for him! You see what comes of letting people
get ever so little out of hand! No, this democratic rabble, with
its quintets, is a poor foundation; what we want is one magnificent,
despotic will, like an idol, resting on something fundamental and
external.... Then the quintets will cringe into obedience and be
obsequiously ready on occasion. But, anyway, though, they are all crying
out now that Stavrogin wanted his wife to be burnt and that that's what
caused the fire in the town, but..."

"Why, are they all saying that?"

"Well, not yet, and I must confess I have heard nothing of the sort, but
what one can do with people, especially when they've been burnt out! _Vox
populi vox Dei_. A stupid rumour is soon set going. But you really have
nothing to be afraid of. From the legal point of view you are all right,
and with your conscience also. For you didn't want it done, did you?
There's no clue, nothing but the coincidence.... The only thing is Fedka
may remember what you said that night at Kirillov's (and what made you
say it?) but that proves nothing and we shall stop Fedka's mouth. I
shall stop it to-day...."

"And weren't the bodies burnt at all?"

"Not a bit; that ruffian could not manage anything properly. But I am
glad, anyway, that you are so calm... for though you are not in any way
to blame, even in thought, but all the same.... And you must admit that
all this settles your difficulties capitally: you are suddenly free and
a widower and can marry a charming girl this minute with a lot of money,
who is already yours, into the bargain. See what can be done by crude,
simple coincidence--eh?"

"Are you threatening me, you fool?"

"Come, leave off, leave off! Here you are, calling me a fool, and what
a tone to use! You ought to be glad, yet you... I rushed here on purpose
to let you know in good time.... Besides, how could I threaten you?
As if I cared for what I could get by threats! I want you to help from
goodwill and not from fear. You are the light and the sun.... It's
I who am terribly afraid of you, not you of me! I am not Mavriky
Nikolaevitch.... And only fancy, as I flew here in a racing droshky I
saw Mavriky Nikolaevitch by the fence at the farthest corner of your
garden... in his greatcoat, drenched through, he must have been sitting
there all night! Queer goings on! How mad people can be!"

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch? Is that true?"

"Yes, yes. He is sitting by the garden fence. About three hundred paces
from here, I think. I made haste to pass him, but he saw me. Didn't you
know? In that case I am glad I didn't forget to tell you. A man like
that is more dangerous than anyone if he happens to have a revolver
about him, and then the night, the sleet, or natural irritability--for
after all he is in a nice position, ha ha! What do you think? Why is he
sitting there?"

"He is waiting for Lizaveta Nikolaevna, of course."

"Well! Why should she go out to him? And... in such rain too... what a
fool!"

"She is just going out to him!"

"Eh! That's a piece of news! So then... But listen, her position is
completely changed now. What does she want with Mavriky now? You
are free, a widower, and can marry her to-morrow. She doesn't know
yet--leave it to me and I'll arrange it all for you. Where is she? We
must relieve her mind too."

"Relieve her mind?"

"Rather! Let's go."

"And do you suppose she won't guess what those dead bodies mean?" said
Stavrogin, screwing up his eyes in a peculiar way.

"Of course she won't," said Pyotr Stepanovitch with all the confidence
of a perfect simpleton, "for legally... Ech, what a man you are! What
if she did guess? Women are so clever at shutting their eyes to such
things, you don't understand women! Apart from it's being altogether
to her interest to marry you now, because there's no denying she's
disgraced herself; apart from that, I talked to her of 'the boat' and I
saw that one could affect her by it, so that shows you what the girl is
made of. Don't be uneasy, she will step over those dead bodies without
turning a hair--especially as you are not to blame for them; not in the
least, are you? She will only keep them in reserve to use them against
you when you've been married two or three years. Every woman saves up
something of the sort out of her husband's past when she gets married,
but by that time... what may not happen in a year? Ha ha!"

"If you've come in a racing droshky, take her to Mavriky Nikolaevitch
now. She said just now that she could not endure me and would leave me,
and she certainly will not accept my carriage."

"What! Can she really be leaving? How can this have come about?" said
Pyotr Stepanovitch, staring stupidly at him.

"She's guessed somehow during this night that I don't love her... which
she knew all along, indeed."

"But don't you love her?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, with an expression
of extreme surprise. "If so, why did you keep her when she came to you
yesterday, instead of telling her plainly like an honourable man that
you didn't care for her? That was horribly shabby on your part; and how
mean you make me look in her eyes!"

Stavrogin suddenly laughed.

"I am laughing at my monkey," he explained at once.

"Ah! You saw that I was putting it on!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch,
laughing too, with great enjoyment. "I did it to amuse you! Only fancy,
as soon as you came out to me I guessed from your face that you'd been
'unlucky.' A complete fiasco, perhaps. Eh? There! I'll bet anything,"
he cried, almost gasping with delight, "that you've been sitting side by
side in the drawing-room all night wasting your precious time discussing
something lofty and elevated.... There, forgive me, forgive me; it's not
my business. I felt sure yesterday that it would all end in foolishness.
I brought her to you simply to amuse you, and to show you that you
wouldn't have a dull time with me. I shall be of use to you a hundred
times in that way. I always like pleasing people. If you don't want her
now, which was what I was reckoning on when I came, then..."

"So you brought her simply for my amusement?"

"Why, what else?"

"Not to make me kill my wife?"

"Come. You've not killed her? What a tragic fellow you are!

"It's just the same; you killed her."

"I didn't kill her! I tell you I had no hand in it.... You are beginning
to make me uneasy, though...."

"Go on. You said, 'if you don't want her now, then... '"

"Then, leave it to me, of course. I can quite easily marry her off to
Mavriky Nikolaevitch, though I didn't make him sit down by the fence.
Don't take that notion into your head. I am afraid of him, now. You talk
about my droshky, but I simply dashed by.... What if he has a revolver?
It's a good thing I brought mine. Here it is." He brought a revolver out
of his pocket, showed it, and hid it again at once. "I took it as I
was coming such a long way.... But I'll arrange all that for you in a
twinkling: her little heart is aching at this moment for Mavriky; it
should be, anyway.... And, do you know, I am really rather sorry for
her? If I take her to Mavriky she will begin about you directly; she
will praise you to him and abuse him to his face. You know the heart of
woman! There you are, laughing again! I am awfully glad that you are so
cheerful now. Come, let's go. I'll begin with Mavriky right away, and
about them... those who've been murdered... hadn't we better keep quiet
now? She'll hear later on, anyway."

"What will she hear? Who's been murdered? What were you saying about
Mavriky Nikolaevitch?" said Liza, suddenly opening the door.

"Ah! You've been listening?"

"What were you saying just now about Mavriky Nikolaevitch? Has he been
murdered?"

"Ah! Then you didn't hear? Don't distress yourself, Mavriky Nikolaevitch
is alive and well, and you can satisfy yourself of it in an instant,
for he is here by the wayside, by the garden fence... and I believe he's
been sitting there all night. He is drenched through in his greatcoat!
He saw me as I drove past."

"That's not true. You said 'murdered.'... Who's been murdered?" she
insisted with agonising mistrust.

"The only people who have been murdered are my wife, her brother
Lebyadkin, and their servant," Stavrogin brought out firmly.

Liza trembled and turned terribly pale.

"A strange brutal outrage, Lizaveta Nikolaevna. A simple case of
robbery," Pyotr Stepanovitch rattled off at once "Simply robbery, under
cover of the fire. The crime was committed by Fedka the convict, and it
was all that fool Lebyadkin's fault for showing every one his
money.... I rushed here with the news... it fell on me like a
thunderbolt. Stavrogin could hardly stand when I told him. We were
deliberating here whether to tell you at once or not?"

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, is he telling the truth?" Liza articulated
faintly.

"No; it's false."

"False?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, starting. "What do you mean by that?"

"Heavens! I shall go mad!" cried Liza.

"Do you understand, anyway, that he is mad now!" Pyotr Stepanovitch
cried at the top of his voice. "After all, his wife has just been
murdered. You see how white he is.... Why, he has been with you the
whole night. He hasn't left your side a minute. How can you suspect
him?"

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, tell me, as before God, are you guilty or not,
and I swear I'll believe your word as though it were God's, and I'll
follow you to the end of the earth. Yes, I will. I'll follow you like a
dog."

"Why are you tormenting her, you fantastic creature?" cried Pyotr
Stepanovitch in exasperation. "Lizaveta Nikolaevna, upon my oath, you
can crush me into powder, but he is not guilty. On the contrary, it has
crushed him, and he is raving, you see that. He is not to blame in
any way, not in any way, not even in thought!... It's all the work of
robbers who will probably be found within a week and flogged.... It's
all the work of Fedka the convict, and some Shpigulin men, all the town
is agog with it. That's why I say so too."

"Is that right? Is that right?" Liza waited trembling for her final
sentence.

"I did not kill them, and I was against it, but I knew they were
going to be killed and I did not stop the murderers. Leave me, Liza,"
Stavrogin brought out, and he walked into the drawing-room.

Liza hid her face in her hands and walked out of the house. Pyotr
Stepanovitch was rushing after her, but at once hurried back and went
into the drawing-room.

"So that's your line? That's your line? So there's nothing you are
afraid of?" He flew at Stavrogin in an absolute fury, muttering
incoherently, scarcely able to find words and foaming at the mouth.

Stavrogin stood in the middle of the room and did not answer a word.
He clutched a lock of his hair in his left hand and smiled helplessly.
Pyotr Stepanovitch pulled him violently by the sleeve.

"Is it all over with you? So that's the line you are taking? You'll
inform against all of us, and go to a monastery yourself, or to the
devil.... But I'll do for you, though you are not afraid of me!"

"Ah! That's you chattering!" said Stavrogin, noticing him at last.
"Run," he said, coming to himself suddenly, "run after her, order the
carriage, don't leave her.... Run, run! Take her home so that no one
may know... and that she mayn't go there... to the bodies... to the
bodies.... Force her to get into the carriage... Alexey Yegorytch!
Alexey Yegorytch!"

"Stay, don't shout! By now she is in Mavriky's arms.... Mavriky won't
put her into your carriage.... Stay! There's something more important
than the carriage!"

He seized his revolver again. Stavrogin looked at him gravely.

"Very well, kill me," he said softly, almost conciliatorily.

"Foo. Damn it! What a maze of false sentiment a man can get into!" said
Pyotr Stepanovitch, shaking with rage. "Yes, really, you ought to be
killed! She ought simply to spit at you! Fine sort of 'magic boat,'
you are; you are a broken-down, leaky old hulk!... You ought to pull
yourself together if only from spite! Ech! Why, what difference would it
make to you since you ask for a bullet through your brains yourself?"

Stavrogin smiled strangely.

"If you were not such a buffoon I might perhaps have said yes now.... If
you had only a grain of sense..."

"I am a buffoon, but I don't want you, my better half, to be one! Do you
understand me?"

Stavrogin did understand, though perhaps no one else did. Shatov, for
instance, was astonished when Stavrogin told him that Pyotr Stepanovitch
had enthusiasm.

"Go to the devil now, and to-morrow perhaps I may wring something out of
myself. Come to-morrow."

"Yes? Yes?"

"How can I tell?... Go to hell. Go to hell." And he walked out of the
room.

"Perhaps, after all, it may be for the best," Pyotr Stepanovitch
muttered to himself as he hid the revolver.

III

He rushed off to overtake Lizaveta Nikolaevna. She had not got far
away, only a few steps, from the house. She had been detained by Alexey
Yegorytch, who was following a step behind her, in a tail coat, and
without a hat; his head was bowed respectfully. He was persistently
entreating her to wait for a carriage; the old man was alarmed and
almost in tears.

"Go along. Your master is asking for tea, and there's no one to give it
to him," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, pushing him away. He took Liza's arm.

She did not pull her arm away, but she seemed hardly to know what she
was doing; she was still dazed.

"To begin with, you are going the wrong way," babbled Pyotr
Stepanovitch. "We ought to go this way, and not by the garden, and,
secondly, walking is impossible in any case. It's over two miles, and
you are not properly dressed. If you would wait a second, I came in a
droshky; the horse is in the yard. I'll get it instantly, put you in,
and get you home so that no one sees you."

"How kind you are," said Liza graciously.

"Oh, not at all. Any humane man in my position would do the same...."

Liza looked at him, and was surprised.

"Good heavens! Why I thought it was that old man here still."

"Listen. I am awfully glad that you take it like this, because it's
all such a frightfully stupid convention, and since it's come to that,
hadn't I better tell the old man to get the carriage at once. It's only
a matter of ten minutes and we'll turn back and wait in the porch, eh?"

"I want first... where are those murdered people?"

"Ah! What next? That was what I was afraid of.... No, we'd better leave
those wretched creatures alone; it's no use your looking at them."

"I know where they are. I know that house."

"Well? What if you do know it? Come; it's raining, and there's a fog.
(A nice job this sacred duty I've taken upon myself.) Listen, Lizaveta
Nikolaevna! It's one of two alternatives. Either you come with me in the
droshky--in that case wait here, and don't take another step, for if we
go another twenty steps we must be seen by Mavriky Nikolaevitch."

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch! Where? Where?"

"Well, if you want to go with him, I'll take you a little farther, if
you like, and show you where he sits, but I don't care to go up to him
just now. No, thank you."

"He is waiting for me. Good God!" she suddenly stopped, and a flush of
colour flooded her face.

"Oh! Come now. If he is an unconventional man! You know, Lizaveta
Nikolaevna, it's none of my business. I am a complete outsider, and you
know that yourself. But, still, I wish you well.... If your 'fairy boat'
has failed you, if it has turned out to be nothing more than a rotten
old hulk, only fit to be chopped up..."

"Ah! That's fine, that's lovely," cried Liza.

"Lovely, and yet your tears are falling. You must have spirit. You must
be as good as a man in every way. In our age, when woman.... Foo, hang
it," Pyotr Stepanovitch was on the point of spitting. "And the chief
point is that there is nothing to regret. It may all turn out for the
best. Mavriky Nikolaevitch is a man.... In fact, he is a man of feeling
though not talkative, but that's a good thing, too, as long as he has no
conventional notions, of course...."

"Lovely, lovely!" Liza laughed hysterically.

"Well, hang it all... Lizaveta Nikolaevna," said Pyotr Stepanovitch
suddenly piqued. "I am simply here on your account.... It's nothing to
me.... I helped you yesterday when you wanted it yourself. To-day ...
well, you can see Mavriky Nikolaevitch from here; there he's sitting; he
doesn't see us. I say, Lizaveta Nikolaevna, have you ever read 'Polenka
Saxe'?"

"What's that?"

"It's the name of a novel, 'Polenka Saxe.' I read it when I was a
student.... In it a very wealthy official of some sort, Saxe, arrested
his wife at a summer villa for infidelity.... But, hang it; it's no
consequence! You'll see, Mavriky Nikolaevitch will make you an offer
before you get home. He doesn't see us yet."

"Ach! Don't let him see us!" Liza cried suddenly, like a mad creature.
"Come away, come away! To the woods, to the fields!"

And she ran back.

"Lizaveta Nikolaevna, this is such cowardice," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch,
running after her. "And why don't you want him to see you? On the
contrary, you must look him straight in the face, with pride.... If it's
some feeling about that... some maidenly... that's such a prejudice, so
out of date... But where are you going? Where are you going? Ech! she is
running! Better go back to Stavrogin's and take my droshky.... Where are
you going? That's the way to the fields! There! She's fallen down!..."

He stopped. Liza was flying along like a bird, not conscious where she
was going, and Pyotr Stepanovitch was already fifty paces behind her.
She stumbled over a mound of earth and fell down. At the same moment
there was the sound of a terrible shout from behind. It came from
Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had seen her flight and her fall, and was
running to her across the field. In a flash Pyotr Stepanovitch had
retired into Stavrogin's gateway to make haste and get into his droshky.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was already standing in terrible alarm by Liza, who
had risen to her feet; he was bending over her and holding her hands in
both of his. All the incredible surroundings of this meeting overwhelmed
him, and tears were rolling down his cheeks. He saw the woman for whom
he had such reverent devotion running madly across the fields, at such
an hour, in such weather, with nothing over her dress, the gay dress she
wore the day before now crumpled and muddy from her fall.... He could
not utter a word; he took off his greatcoat, and with trembling hands
put it round her shoulders. Suddenly he uttered a cry, feeling that she
had pressed her lips to his hand.

"Liza," he cried, "I am no good for anything, but don't drive me away
from you!"

"Oh, no! Let us make haste away from here. Don't leave me!" and, seizing
his hand, she drew him after her. "Mavriky Nikolaevitch," she suddenly
dropped her voice timidly, "I kept a bold face there all the time, but
now I am afraid of death. I shall die soon, very soon, but I am afraid,
I am afraid to die...." she whispered, pressing his hand tight.

"Oh, if there were some one," he looked round in despair. "Some
passer-by! You will get your feet wet, you... will lose your reason!"

"It's all right; it's all right," she tried to reassure him. "That's
right. I am not so frightened with you. Hold my hand, lead me.... Where
are we going now? Home? No! I want first to see the people who have been
murdered. His wife has been murdered they say, and he says he killed
her himself. But that's not true, is it? I want to see for myself those
three who've been killed... on my account... it's because of them his
love for me has grown cold since last night.... I shall see and find out
everything. Make haste, make haste, I know the house... there's a fire
there.... Mavriky Nikolaevitch, my dear one, don't forgive me in my
shame! Why forgive me? Why are you crying? Give me a blow and kill me
here in the field, like a dog!"

"No one is your judge now," Mavriky Nikolaevitch pronounced firmly. "God
forgive you. I least of all can be your judge."

But it would be strange to describe their conversation. And meanwhile
they walked hand in hand quickly, hurrying as though they were crazy.
They were going straight towards the fire. Mavriky Nikolaevitch still
had hopes of meeting a cart at least, but no one came that way. A mist
of fine, drizzling rain enveloped the whole country, swallowing up every
ray of light, every gleam of colour, and transforming everything into
one smoky, leaden, indistinguishable mass. It had long been daylight,
yet it seemed as though it were still night. And suddenly in this cold
foggy mist there appeared coming towards them a strange and absurd
figure. Picturing it now I think I should not have believed my eyes if
I had been in Lizaveta Nikolaevna's place, yet she uttered a cry of
joy, and recognised the approaching figure at once. It was Stepan
Trofimovitch. How he had gone off, how the insane, impracticable idea
of his flight came to be carried out, of that later. I will only mention
that he was in a fever that morning, yet even illness did not prevent
his starting. He was walking resolutely on the damp ground. It was
evident that he had planned the enterprise to the best of his ability,
alone with his inexperience and lack of practical sense. He wore
"travelling dress," that is, a greatcoat with a wide patent-leather
belt, fastened with a buckle and a pair of new high boots pulled over
his trousers. Probably he had for some time past pictured a traveller as
looking like this, and the belt and the high boots with the shining tops
like a hussar's, in which he could hardly walk, had been ready some time
