his hand to impose silence. "Allow me! With these gentlemen... all
these gentlemen," he added, suddenly addressing the prince, "on certain
points... that is..." He thumped the table repeatedly, and the laughter
increased. Lebedeff was in his usual evening condition, and had just
ended a long and scientific argument, which had left him excited and
irritable. On such occasions he was apt to evince a supreme contempt for
his opponents.

"It is not right! Half an hour ago, prince, it was agreed among us that
no one should interrupt, no one should laugh, that each person was to
express his thoughts freely; and then at the end, when everyone had
spoken, objections might be made, even by the atheists. We chose the
general as president. Now without some such rule and order, anyone might
be shouted down, even in the loftiest and most profound thought...."

"Go on! Go on! Nobody is going to interrupt you!" cried several voices.

"Speak, but keep to the point!"

"What is this 'star'?" asked another.

"I have no idea," replied General Ivolgin, who presided with much
gravity.

"I love these arguments, prince," said Keller, also more than half
intoxicated, moving restlessly in his chair. "Scientific and political."
Then, turning suddenly towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was seated near
him: "Do you know, I simply adore reading the accounts of the debates in
the English parliament. Not that the discussions themselves interest
me; I am not a politician, you know; but it delights me to see how they
address each other 'the noble lord who agrees with me,' 'my honourable
opponent who astonished Europe with his proposal,' 'the noble viscount
sitting opposite'--all these expressions, all this parliamentarism of
a free people, has an enormous attraction for me. It fascinates me,
prince. I have always been an artist in the depths of my soul, I assure
you, Evgenie Pavlovitch."

"Do you mean to say," cried Gania, from the other corner, "do you mean
to say that railways are accursed inventions, that they are a source of
ruin to humanity, a poison poured upon the earth to corrupt the springs
of life?"

Gavrila Ardalionovitch was in high spirits that evening, and it seemed
to the prince that his gaiety was mingled with triumph. Of course he was
only joking with Lebedeff, meaning to egg him on, but he grew excited
himself at the same time.

"Not the railways, oh dear, no!" replied Lebedeff, with a mixture of
violent anger and extreme enjoyment. "Considered alone, the railways
will not pollute the springs of life, but as a whole they are accursed.
The whole tendency of our latest centuries, in its scientific and
materialistic aspect, is most probably accursed."

"Is it certainly accursed?... or do you only mean it might be? That is
an important point," said Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"It is accursed, certainly accursed!" replied the clerk, vehemently.

"Don't go so fast, Lebedeff; you are much milder in the morning," said
Ptitsin, smiling.

"But, on the other hand, more frank in the evening! In the evening
sincere and frank," repeated Lebedeff, earnestly. "More candid, more
exact, more honest, more honourable, and... although I may show you my
weak side, I challenge you all; you atheists, for instance! How are you
going to save the world? How find a straight road of progress, you men
of science, of industry, of cooperation, of trades unions, and all the
rest? How are you going to save it, I say? By what? By credit? What is
credit? To what will credit lead you?"

"You are too inquisitive," remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"Well, anyone who does not interest himself in questions such as this
is, in my opinion, a mere fashionable dummy."

"But it will lead at least to solidarity, and balance of interests,"
said Ptitsin.

"You will reach that with nothing to help you but credit? Without
recourse to any moral principle, having for your foundation only
individual selfishness, and the satisfaction of material desires?
Universal peace, and the happiness of mankind as a whole, being the
result! Is it really so that I may understand you, sir?"

"But the universal necessity of living, of drinking, of eating--in
short, the whole scientific conviction that this necessity can only be
satisfied by universal co-operation and the solidarity of interests--is,
it seems to me, a strong enough idea to serve as a basis, so to speak,
and a 'spring of life,' for humanity in future centuries," said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch, now thoroughly roused.

"The necessity of eating and drinking, that is to say, solely the
instinct of self-preservation..."

"Is not that enough? The instinct of self-preservation is the normal law
of humanity..."

"Who told you that?" broke in Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"It is a law, doubtless, but a law neither more nor less normal than
that of destruction, even self-destruction. Is it possible that
the whole normal law of humanity is contained in this sentiment of
self-preservation?"

"Ah!" cried Hippolyte, turning towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, and looking
at him with a queer sort of curiosity.

Then seeing that Radomski was laughing, he began to laugh himself,
nudged Colia, who was sitting beside him, with his elbow, and again
asked what time it was. He even pulled Colia's silver watch out of his
hand, and looked at it eagerly. Then, as if he had forgotten everything,
he stretched himself out on the sofa, put his hands behind his head, and
looked up at the sky. After a minute or two he got up and came back
to the table to listen to Lebedeff's outpourings, as the latter
passionately commentated on Evgenie Pavlovitch's paradox.

"That is an artful and traitorous idea. A smart notion," vociferated
the clerk, "thrown out as an apple of discord. But it is just. You are a
scoffer, a man of the world, a cavalry officer, and, though not without
brains, you do not realize how profound is your thought, nor how true.
Yes, the laws of self-preservation and of self-destruction are equally
powerful in this world. The devil will hold his empire over humanity
until a limit of time which is still unknown. You laugh? You do not
believe in the devil? Scepticism as to the devil is a French idea, and
it is also a frivolous idea. Do you know who the devil is? Do you know
his name? Although you don't know his name you make a mockery of his
form, following the example of Voltaire. You sneer at his hoofs, at
his tail, at his horns--all of them the produce of your imagination! In
reality the devil is a great and terrible spirit, with neither
hoofs, nor tail, nor horns; it is you who have endowed him with these
attributes! But... he is not the question just now!"

"How do you know he is not the question now?" cried Hippolyte, laughing
hysterically.

"Another excellent idea, and worth considering!" replied Lebedeff. "But,
again, that is not the question. The question at this moment is whether
we have not weakened 'the springs of life' by the extension..."

"Of railways?" put in Colia eagerly.

"Not railways, properly speaking, presumptuous youth, but the general
tendency of which railways may be considered as the outward expression
and symbol. We hurry and push and hustle, for the good of humanity!
'The world is becoming too noisy, too commercial!' groans some solitary
thinker. 'Undoubtedly it is, but the noise of waggons bearing bread to
starving humanity is of more value than tranquillity of soul,' replies
another triumphantly, and passes on with an air of pride. As for me, I
don't believe in these waggons bringing bread to humanity. For, founded
on no moral principle, these may well, even in the act of carrying bread
to humanity, coldly exclude a considerable portion of humanity from
enjoying it; that has been seen more than once.

"What, these waggons may coldly exclude?" repeated someone.

"That has been seen already," continued Lebedeff, not deigning to
notice the interruption. "Malthus was a friend of humanity, but, with
ill-founded moral principles, the friend of humanity is the devourer of
humanity, without mentioning his pride; for, touch the vanity of one of
these numberless philanthropists, and to avenge his self-esteem, he will
be ready at once to set fire to the whole globe; and to tell the truth,
we are all more or less like that. I, perhaps, might be the first to set
a light to the fuel, and then run away. But, again, I must repeat, that
is not the question."

"What is it then, for goodness' sake?"

"He is boring us!"

"The question is connected with the following anecdote of past times;
for I am obliged to relate a story. In our times, and in our country,
which I hope you love as much as I do, for as far as I am concerned, I
am ready to shed the last drop of my blood...

"Go on! Go on!"

"In our dear country, as indeed in the whole of Europe, a famine visits
humanity about four times a century, as far as I can remember; once in
every twenty-five years. I won't swear to this being the exact figure,
but anyhow they have become comparatively rare."

"Comparatively to what?"

"To the twelfth century, and those immediately preceding and following
it. We are told by historians that widespread famines occurred in those
days every two or three years, and such was the condition of things that
men actually had recourse to cannibalism, in secret, of course. One of
these cannibals, who had reached a good age, declared of his own free
will that during the course of his long and miserable life he had
personally killed and eaten, in the most profound secrecy, sixty monks,
not to mention several children; the number of the latter he thought was
about six, an insignificant total when compared with the enormous mass
of ecclesiastics consumed by him. As to adults, laymen that is to say,
he had never touched them."

The president joined in the general outcry.

"That's impossible!" said he in an aggrieved tone. "I am often
discussing subjects of this nature with him, gentlemen, but for the
most part he talks nonsense enough to make one deaf: this story has no
pretence of being true."

"General, remember the siege of Kars! And you, gentlemen, I assure you
my anecdote is the naked truth. I may remark that reality, although it
is governed by invariable law, has at times a resemblance to falsehood.
In fact, the truer a thing is the less true it sounds."

"But could anyone possibly eat sixty monks?" objected the scoffing
listeners.

"It is quite clear that he did not eat them all at once, but in a
space of fifteen or twenty years: from that point of view the thing is
comprehensible and natural..."

"Natural?"

"And natural," repeated Lebedeff with pedantic obstinacy. "Besides, a
Catholic monk is by nature excessively curious; it would be quite easy
therefore to entice him into a wood, or some secret place, on false
pretences, and there to deal with him as said. But I do not dispute in
the least that the number of persons consumed appears to denote a spice
of greediness."

"It is perhaps true, gentlemen," said the prince, quietly. He had
been listening in silence up to that moment without taking part in the
conversation, but laughing heartily with the others from time to time.
Evidently he was delighted to see that everybody was amused, that
everybody was talking at once, and even that everybody was drinking.
It seemed as if he were not intending to speak at all, when suddenly
he intervened in such a serious voice that everyone looked at him with
interest.

"It is true that there were frequent famines at that time, gentlemen.
I have often heard of them, though I do not know much history. But it
seems to me that it must have been so. When I was in Switzerland I used
to look with astonishment at the many ruins of feudal castles perched
on the top of steep and rocky heights, half a mile at least above
sea-level, so that to reach them one had to climb many miles of stony
tracks. A castle, as you know, is, a kind of mountain of stones--a
dreadful, almost an impossible, labour! Doubtless the builders were
all poor men, vassals, and had to pay heavy taxes, and to keep up the
priesthood. How, then, could they provide for themselves, and when
had they time to plough and sow their fields? The greater number must,
literally, have died of starvation. I have sometimes asked myself how
it was that these communities were not utterly swept off the face of the
earth, and how they could possibly survive. Lebedeff is not mistaken,
in my opinion, when he says that there were cannibals in those days,
perhaps in considerable numbers; but I do not understand why he should
have dragged in the monks, nor what he means by that."

"It is undoubtedly because, in the twelfth century, monks were the only
people one could eat; they were the fat, among many lean," said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch.

"A brilliant idea, and most true!" cried Lebedeff, "for he never
even touched the laity. Sixty monks, and not a single layman! It is a
terrible idea, but it is historic, it is statistic; it is indeed one of
those facts which enables an intelligent historian to reconstruct the
physiognomy of a special epoch, for it brings out this further point
with mathematical accuracy, that the clergy were in those days sixty
times richer and more flourishing than the rest of humanity and perhaps
sixty times fatter also..."

"You are exaggerating, you are exaggerating, Lebedeff!" cried his
hearers, amid laughter.

"I admit that it is an historic thought, but what is your conclusion?"
asked the prince.

He spoke so seriously in addressing Lebedeff, that his tone contrasted
quite comically with that of the others. They were very nearly laughing
at him, too, but he did not notice it.

"Don't you see he is a lunatic, prince?" whispered Evgenie Pavlovitch
in his ear. "Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched on the
subject of lawyers, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends
to pass the examinations. I am expecting a splendid burlesque now."

"My conclusion is vast," replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder. "Let
us examine first the psychological and legal position of the criminal.
We see that in spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the
accused, or, as we may say, my client, has often during his peculiar
life exhibited signs of repentance, and of wishing to give up this
clerical diet. Incontrovertible facts prove this assertion. He has eaten
five or six children, a relatively insignificant number, no doubt,
but remarkable enough from another point of view. It is manifest that,
pricked by remorse--for my client is religious, in his way, and has a
conscience, as I shall prove later--and desiring to extenuate his sin
as far as possible, he has tried six times at least to substitute lay
nourishment for clerical. That this was merely an experiment we can
hardly doubt: for if it had been only a question of gastronomic variety,
six would have been too few; why only six? Why not thirty? But if we
regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing new
sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts
to calm his remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply
suffice, for these attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In
my humble opinion, a child is too small; I should say, not sufficient;
which would result in four or five times more lay children than monks
being required in a given time. The sin, lessened on the one hand, would
therefore be increased on the other, in quantity, not in quality. Please
understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus, I am taking the point of
view which might have been taken by a criminal of the middle ages. As
for myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course, should
reason differently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer
at me nor mock me, gentlemen. As for you, general, it is still more
unbecoming on your part. In the second place, and giving my own personal
opinion, a child's flesh is not a satisfying diet; it is too insipid,
too sweet; and the criminal, in making these experiments, could have
satisfied neither his conscience nor his appetite. I am about to
conclude, gentlemen; and my conclusion contains a reply to one of the
most important questions of that day and of our own! This criminal ended
at last by denouncing himself to the clergy, and giving himself up to
justice. We cannot but ask, remembering the penal system of that day,
and the tortures that awaited him--the wheel, the stake, the fire!--we
cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him to accuse himself of this
crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number sixty, and keep
his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave the
monks alone, and go into the desert to repent? Or why not become a
monk himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There must have been
something stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the habits
of twenty years! There must have been an idea more powerful than all
the calamities and sorrows of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or
plague--an idea which entered into the heart, directed and enlarged the
springs of life, and made even that hell supportable to humanity!
Show me a force, a power like that, in this our century of vices
and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of steamboats and
railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways, because I
am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men nowadays
with half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to
maintain that the 'springs of life' have not been polluted and weakened
beneath this 'star,' beneath this network in which men are entangled!
Don't talk to me about your prosperity, your riches, the rarity of
famine, the rapidity of the means of transport! There is more of riches,
but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to heart and soul
exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp--we are all of us limp....
Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the
question is now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you
are about to provide for us!"

Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it
should be remarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his
speech); but this unexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent
spirits. "That's how a clever barrister makes a good point!" said he,
when speaking of his peroration later on. The visitors began to laugh
and chatter once again; the committee left their seats, and stretched
their legs on the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted with
Lebedeff and his speech; he turned from one to another, saying in a loud
voice:

"He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth
century, he makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means
the innocent he makes himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy
this house, allow me to ask?"

In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers,
among them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. "I have known," said he,
"a real interpreter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch
Burmistroff, and he--he pierced the heart like a fiery flash! He began
by putting on his spectacles, then he opened a large black book;
his white beard, and his two medals on his breast, recalling acts of
charity, all added to his impressiveness. He began in a stern voice, and
before him generals, hard men of the world, bowed down, and ladies
fell to the ground fainting. But this one here--he ends by announcing a
banquet! That is not the real thing!"

Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he
had intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen
from the table, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away
his glass, a dark shadow seemed to come over his face. When they all
rose, he went and sat down by Rogojin. It might have been believed that
quite friendly relations existed between them. Rogojin, who had also
seemed on the point of going away now sat motionless, his head bent,
seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had drunk no wine, and
appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised his eyes,
and examined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was
expecting something very important to himself, and that he had decided
to wait for it. The prince had taken two or three glasses of champagne,
and seemed cheerful. As he rose he noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and,
remembering the appointment he had made with him, smiled pleasantly.
Evgenie Pavlovitch made a sign with his head towards Hippolyte, whom he
was attentively watching. The invalid was fast asleep, stretched out on
the sofa.

"Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon you?"
he asked, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the
prince was quite surprised. "I wouldn't mind laying odds that he is up
to some mischief."

"I have observed," said the prince, "that he seems to be an object of
very singular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?"

"You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account,
without him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot
tear my eyes and thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy."

"Oh, come! He has a handsome face."

"Why, look at him--look at him now!"

The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable
surprise.

V.

Hippolyte, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff's discourse, now
suddenly woke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He
shuddered, raised himself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale.
A look almost of terror crossed his face as he recollected.

"What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?" He trembled,
and caught at the prince's hand. "What time is it? Tell me, quick, for
goodness' sake! How long have I slept?" he added, almost in despair,
just as though he had overslept something upon which his whole fate
depended.

"You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.

"Oh, is that all?" he said at last. "Then I--"

He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that
all was not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests
had merely gone to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on
his cheeks.

"So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
he said, ironically. "You have not taken your eyes off me all the
evening--I have noticed that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin! I've just
been dreaming about him, prince," he added, frowning. "Yes, by the by,"
starting up, "where's the orator? Where's Lebedeff? Has he finished?
What did he talk about? Is it true, prince, that you once declared that
'beauty would save the world'? Great Heaven! The prince says that beauty
saves the world! And I declare that he only has such playful ideas
because he's in love! Gentlemen, the prince is in love. I guessed it the
moment he came in. Don't blush, prince; you make me sorry for you. What
beauty saves the world? Colia told me that you are a zealous Christian;
is it so? Colia says you call yourself a Christian."

The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.

"You don't answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of you?" added
Hippolyte, as though the words had been drawn from him.

"No, I don't think that. I know you don't love me."

"What, after yesterday? Wasn't I honest with you?"

"I knew yesterday that you didn't love me."

"Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know.
But do you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some
more champagne--pour me out some, Keller, will you?"

"No, you're not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won't let you." The
prince moved the glass away.

"Well perhaps you're right," said Hippolyte, musing. "They might
say--yet, devil take them! what does it matter?--prince, what can it
matter what people will say of us _then_, eh? I believe I'm half asleep.
I've had such a dreadful dream--I've only just remembered it. Prince, I
don't wish you such dreams as that, though sure enough, perhaps, I _don't_
love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not love him, eh? Give
me your hand--let me press it sincerely. There--you've given me your
hand--you must feel that I _do_ press it sincerely, don't you? I don't
think I shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know the
time. The time has come, at all events. What! they are laying supper
over there, are they? Then this table is free? Capital, gentlemen!
I--hem! these gentlemen are not listening. Prince, I will just read over
an article I have here. Supper is more interesting, of course, but--"

Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his
breast-pocket a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he
placed upon the table before him.

The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous.
Evgenie Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin
drew nearer to the table with a look on his face as if he knew what was
coming. Gania came nearer too; so did Lebedeff and the others--the paper
seemed to be an object of great interest to the company in general.

"What have you got there?" asked the prince, with some anxiety.

"At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I
told you I would, word of honour! You shall see!" cried Hippolyte.
"You think I'm not capable of opening this packet, do you?" He glared
defiantly round at the audience in general.

The prince observed that he was trembling all over.

"None of us ever thought such a thing!" Muishkin replied for all. "Why
should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read, Hippolyte?
What is it?"

"Yes, what is it?" asked others. The packet sealed with red wax seemed
to attract everyone, as though it were a magnet.

"I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told
you I would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished
it this morning early. Afterwards I had a dream."

"Hadn't we better hear it tomorrow?" asked the prince timidly.

"Tomorrow 'there will be no more time!'" laughed Hippolyte,
hysterically. "You needn't be afraid; I shall get through the whole
thing in forty minutes, at most an hour! Look how interested everybody
is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! look at them all staring at my
sealed packet! If I hadn't sealed it up it wouldn't have been half so
effective! Ha, ha! that's mystery, that is! Now then, gentlemen, shall
I break the seal or not? Say the word; it's a mystery, I tell you--a
secret! Prince, you know who said there would be 'no more time'? It was
the great and powerful angel in the Apocalypse."

"Better not read it now," said the prince, putting his hand on the
packet.

"No, don't read it!" cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so strangely
disturbed that many of those present could not help wondering.

"Reading? None of your reading now!" said somebody; "it's supper-time."
"What sort of an article is it? For a paper? Probably it's very
dull," said another. But the prince's timid gesture had impressed even
Hippolyte.

"Then I'm not to read it?" he whispered, nervously. "Am I not to read
it?" he repeated, gazing around at each face in turn. "What are you
afraid of, prince?" he turned and asked the latter suddenly.

"What should I be afraid of?"

"Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece, somebody!"
And Hippolyte leapt from his chair.

"Here you are," said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy had
gone mad.

"Vera Lukianovna," said Hippolyte, "toss it, will you? Heads, I read,
tails, I don't."

Vera Lebedeff tossed the coin into the air and let it fall on the table.

It was "heads."

"Then I read it," said Hippolyte, in the tone of one bowing to the fiat
of destiny. He could not have grown paler if a verdict of death had
suddenly been presented to him.

"But after all, what is it? Is it possible that I should have just
risked my fate by tossing up?" he went on, shuddering; and looked round
him again. His eyes had a curious expression of sincerity. "That is
an astonishing psychological fact," he cried, suddenly addressing
the prince, in a tone of the most intense surprise. "It is... it
is something quite inconceivable, prince," he repeated with growing
animation, like a man regaining consciousness. "Take note of it,
prince, remember it; you collect, I am told, facts concerning capital
punishment... They told me so. Ha, ha! My God, how absurd!" He sat
down on the sofa, put his elbows on the table, and laid his head on
his hands. "It is shameful--though what does it matter to me if it is
shameful?

"Gentlemen, gentlemen! I am about to break the seal," he continued, with
determination. "I--I--of course I don't insist upon anyone listening if
they do not wish to."

With trembling fingers he broke the seal and drew out several sheets of
paper, smoothed them out before him, and began sorting them.

"What on earth does all this mean? What's he going to read?" muttered
several voices. Others said nothing; but one and all sat down and
watched with curiosity. They began to think something strange might
really be about to happen. Vera stood and trembled behind her father's
chair, almost in tears with fright; Colia was nearly as much alarmed
as she was. Lebedeff jumped up and put a couple of candles nearer to
Hippolyte, so that he might see better.

"Gentlemen, this--you'll soon see what this is," began Hippolyte, and
suddenly commenced his reading.

"It's headed, 'A Necessary Explanation,' with the motto, '_Après moi
le déluge!_' Oh, deuce take it all! Surely I can never have seriously
written such a silly motto as that? Look here, gentlemen, I beg to give
notice that all this is very likely terrible nonsense. It is only a few
ideas of mine. If you think that there is anything mysterious coming--or
in a word--"

"Better read on without any more beating about the bush," said Gania.

"Affectation!" remarked someone else.

"Too much talk," said Rogojin, breaking the silence for the first time.

Hippolyte glanced at him suddenly, and when their eye, met Rogojin
showed his teeth in a disagreeable smile, and said the following strange
words: "That's not the way to settle this business, my friend; that's
not the way at all."

Of course nobody knew what Rogojin meant by this; but his words made
a deep impression upon all. Everyone seemed to see in a flash the same
idea.

As for Hippolyte, their effect upon him was astounding. He trembled so
that the prince was obliged to support him, and would certainly have
cried out, but that his voice seemed to have entirely left him for the
moment. For a minute or two he could not speak at all, but panted and
stared at Rogojin. At last he managed to ejaculate:

"Then it was _you_ who came--_you_--_you?_"

"Came where? What do you mean?" asked Rogojin, amazed. But Hippolyte,
panting and choking with excitement, interrupted him violently.

"_You_ came to me last week, in the night, at two o'clock, the day I was
with you in the morning! Confess it was you!"

"Last week? In the night? Have you gone cracked, my good friend?"

Hippolyte paused and considered a moment. Then a smile of
cunning--almost triumph--crossed his lips.

"It was you," he murmured, almost in a whisper, but with absolute
conviction. "Yes, it was you who came to my room and sat silently on a
chair at my window for a whole hour--more! It was between one and two
at night; you rose and went out at about three. It was you, you! Why you
should have frightened me so, why you should have wished to torment me
like that, I cannot tell--but you it was."

There was absolute hatred in his eyes as he said this, but his look of
fear and his trembling had not left him.

"You shall hear all this directly, gentlemen. I--I--listen!"

He seized his paper in a desperate hurry; he fidgeted with it, and tried
to sort it, but for a long while his trembling hands could not collect
the sheets together. "He's either mad or delirious," murmured Rogojin.
At last he began.

For the first five minutes the reader's voice continued to tremble,
and he read disconnectedly and unevenly; but gradually his voice
strengthened. Occasionally a violent fit of coughing stopped him, but
his animation grew with the progress of the reading--as did also the
disagreeable impression which it made upon his audience,--until it
reached the highest pitch of excitement.

Here is the article.

MY NECESSARY EXPLANATION.

"_Après moi le déluge._

"Yesterday morning the prince came to see me. Among other things he
asked me to come down to his villa. I knew he would come and persuade
me to this step, and that he would adduce the argument that it would be
easier for me to die' among people and green trees,'--as he expressed
it. But today he did not say 'die,' he said 'live.' It is pretty much
the same to me, in my position, which he says. When I asked him why he
made such a point of his 'green trees,' he told me, to my astonishment,
that he had heard that last time I was in Pavlofsk I had said that I had
come 'to have a last look at the trees.'

"When I observed that it was all the same whether one died among trees
or in front of a blank brick wall, as here, and that it was not worth
making any fuss over a fortnight, he agreed at once. But he insisted
that the good air at Pavlofsk and the greenness would certainly cause a
physical change for the better, and that my excitement, and my _dreams_,
would be perhaps relieved. I remarked to him, with a smile, that he
spoke like a materialist, and he answered that he had always been one.
As he never tells a lie, there must be something in his words. His smile
is a pleasant one. I have had a good look at him. I don't know whether
I like him or not; and I have no time to waste over the question. The
hatred which I felt for him for five months has become considerably
modified, I may say, during the last month. Who knows, perhaps I am
going to Pavlofsk on purpose to see him! But why do I leave my chamber?
Those who are sentenced to death should not leave their cells. If I
had not formed a final resolve, but had decided to wait until the last
minute, I should not leave my room, or accept his invitation to come
and die at Pavlofsk. I must be quick and finish this explanation before
tomorrow. I shall have no time to read it over and correct it, for I
must read it tomorrow to the prince and two or three witnesses whom I
shall probably find there.

"As it will be absolutely true, without a touch of falsehood, I am
curious to see what impression it will make upon me myself at the moment
when I read it out. This is my 'last and solemn'--but why need I call
it that? There is no question about the truth of it, for it is not
worthwhile lying for a fortnight; a fortnight of life is not itself
worth having, which is a proof that I write nothing here but pure truth.

("N.B.--Let me remember to consider; am I mad at this moment, or not? or
rather at these moments? I have been told that consumptives sometimes
do go out of their minds for a while in the last stages of the malady.
I can prove this tomorrow when I read it out, by the impression it
makes upon the audience. I must settle this question once and for all,
otherwise I can't go on with anything.)

"I believe I have just written dreadful nonsense; but there's no time
for correcting, as I said before. Besides that, I have made myself a
promise not to alter a single word of what I write in this paper, even
though I find that I am contradicting myself every five lines. I wish to
verify the working of the natural logic of my ideas tomorrow during the
reading--whether I am capable of detecting logical errors, and whether
all that I have meditated over during the last six months be true, or
nothing but delirium.

"If two months since I had been called upon to leave my room and the
view of Meyer's wall opposite, I verily believe I should have been
sorry. But now I have no such feeling, and yet I am leaving this room
and Meyer's brick wall _for ever_. So that my conclusion, that it is not
worth while indulging in grief, or any other emotion, for a fortnight,
has proved stronger than my very nature, and has taken over the
direction of my feelings. But is it so? Is it the case that my nature
is conquered entirely? If I were to be put on the rack now, I should
certainly cry out. I should not say that it is not worth while to yell
and feel pain because I have but a fortnight to live.

"But is it true that I have but a fortnight of life left to me? I know I
told some of my friends that Doctor B. had informed me that this was the
case; but I now confess that I lied; B. has not even seen me. However,
a week ago, I called in a medical student, Kislorodoff, who is a
Nationalist, an Atheist, and a Nihilist, by conviction, and that is why
I had him. I needed a man who would tell me the bare truth without any
humbug or ceremony--and so he did--indeed, almost with pleasure (which I
thought was going a little too far).

"Well, he plumped out that I had about a month left me; it might be a
little more, he said, under favourable circumstances, but it might
also be considerably less. According to his opinion I might die quite
suddenly--tomorrow, for instance--there had been such cases. Only a day
or two since a young lady at Colomna who suffered from consumption, and
was about on a par with myself in the march of the disease, was going
out to market to buy provisions, when she suddenly felt faint, lay down
on the sofa, gasped once, and died.

"Kislorodoff told me all this with a sort of exaggerated devil-may-care
negligence, and as though he did me great honour by talking to me
so, because it showed that he considered me the same sort of exalted
Nihilistic being as himself, to whom death was a matter of no
consequence whatever, either way.

"At all events, the fact remained--a month of life and no more! That he
is right in his estimation I am absolutely persuaded.

"It puzzles me much to think how on earth the prince guessed yesterday
that I have had bad dreams. He said to me, 'Your excitement and dreams
will find relief at Pavlofsk.' Why did he say 'dreams'? Either he is a
doctor, or else he is a man of exceptional intelligence and wonderful
powers of observation. (But that he is an 'idiot,' at bottom there can
be no doubt whatever.) It so happened that just before he arrived I had
a delightful little dream; one of a kind that I have hundreds of just
now. I had fallen asleep about an hour before he came in, and dreamed
that I was in some room, not my own. It was a large room, well
furnished, with a cupboard, chest of drawers, sofa, and my bed, a fine
wide bed covered with a silken counterpane. But I observed in the room
a dreadful-looking creature, a sort of monster. It was a little like a
scorpion, but was not a scorpion, but far more horrible, and especially
so, because there are no creatures anything like it in nature, and
because it had appeared to me for a purpose, and bore some mysterious
signification. I looked at the beast well; it was brown in colour and
had a shell; it was a crawling kind of reptile, about eight inches long,
and narrowed down from the head, which was about a couple of fingers in
width, to the end of the tail, which came to a fine point. Out of its
trunk, about a couple of inches below its head, came two legs at an
angle of forty-five degrees, each about three inches long, so that the
beast looked like a trident from above. It had eight hard needle-like
whiskers coming out from different parts of its body; it went along like
a snake, bending its body about in spite of the shell it wore, and its
motion was very quick and very horrible to look at. I was dreadfully
afraid it would sting me; somebody had told me, I thought, that it
was venomous; but what tormented me most of all was the wondering and
wondering as to who had sent it into my room, and what was the mystery
which I felt it contained.

"It hid itself under the cupboard and under the chest of drawers, and
crawled into the corners. I sat on a chair and kept my legs tucked
under me. Then the beast crawled quietly across the room and disappeared
somewhere near my chair. I looked about for it in terror, but I still
hoped that as my feet were safely tucked away it would not be able to
touch me.

"Suddenly I heard behind me, and about on a level with my head, a sort
of rattling sound. I turned sharp round and saw that the brute had
crawled up the wall as high as the level of my face, and that its
horrible tail, which was moving incredibly fast from side to side, was
actually touching my hair! I jumped up--and it disappeared. I did not
dare lie down on my bed for fear it should creep under my pillow. My
mother came into the room, and some friends of hers. They began to hunt
for the reptile and were more composed than I was; they did not seem to
be afraid of it. But they did not understand as I did.

"Suddenly the monster reappeared; it crawled slowly across the room and
made for the door, as though with some fixed intention, and with a slow
movement that was more horrible than ever.

"Then my mother opened the door and called my dog, Norma. Norma was a
great Newfoundland, and died five years ago.

"She sprang forward and stood still in front of the reptile as if she
had been turned to stone. The beast stopped too, but its tail and
claws still moved about. I believe animals are incapable of feeling
supernatural fright--if I have been rightly informed,--but at this
moment there appeared to me to be something more than ordinary about
Norma's terror, as though it must be supernatural; and as though she
felt, just as I did myself, that this reptile was connected with some
mysterious secret, some fatal omen.

"Norma backed slowly and carefully away from the brute, which followed
her, creeping deliberately after her as though it intended to make a
sudden dart and sting her.

"In spite of Norma's terror she looked furious, though she trembled in
all her limbs. At length she slowly bared her terrible teeth, opened
her great red jaws, hesitated--took courage, and seized the beast in her
mouth. It seemed to try to dart out of her jaws twice, but Norma caught
at it and half swallowed it as it was escaping. The shell cracked in her
teeth; and the tail and legs stuck out of her mouth and shook about in
a horrible manner. Suddenly Norma gave a piteous whine; the reptile had
bitten her tongue. She opened her mouth wide with the pain, and I saw
the beast lying across her tongue, and out of its body, which was almost
bitten in two, came a hideous white-looking substance, oozing out into
Norma's mouth; it was of the consistency of a crushed black-beetle just
then I awoke and the prince entered the room."

"Gentlemen!" said Hippolyte, breaking off here, "I have not done yet,
but it seems to me that I have written down a great deal here that is
unnecessary,--this dream--"

"You have indeed!" said Gania.

"There is too much about myself, I know, but--" As Hippolyte said this
his face wore a tired, pained look, and he wiped the sweat off his brow.

"Yes," said Lebedeff, "you certainly think a great deal too much about
yourself."

"Well--gentlemen--I do not force anyone to listen! If any of you are
unwilling to sit it out, please go away, by all means!"

"He turns people out of a house that isn't his own," muttered Rogojin.

"Suppose we all go away?" said Ferdishenko suddenly.

Hippolyte clutched his manuscript, and gazing at the last speaker with
glittering eyes, said: "You don't like me at all!" A few laughed at
this, but not all.

"Hippolyte," said the prince, "give me the papers, and go to bed like a
sensible fellow. We'll have a good talk tomorrow, but you really mustn't
go on with this reading; it is not good for you!"

"How can I? How can I?" cried Hippolyte, looking at him in amazement.
"Gentlemen! I was a fool! I won't break off again. Listen, everyone who
wants to!"

He gulped down some water out of a glass standing near, bent over the
table, in order to hide his face from the audience, and recommenced.

"The idea that it is not worth while living for a few weeks took
possession of me a month ago, when I was told that I had four weeks to
live, but only partially so at that time. The idea quite overmastered me
three days since, that evening at Pavlofsk. The first time that I felt
really impressed with this thought was on the terrace at the prince's,
at the very moment when I had taken it into my head to make a last trial
of life. I wanted to see people and trees (I believe I said so myself),
I got excited, I maintained Burdovsky's rights, 'my neighbour!'--I
dreamt that one and all would open their arms, and embrace me, that
there would be an indescribable exchange of forgiveness between us all!
In a word, I behaved like a fool, and then, at that very same instant, I
felt my 'last conviction.' I ask myself now how I could have waited six
months for that conviction! I knew that I had a disease that spares
no one, and I really had no illusions; but the more I realized my
condition, the more I clung to life; I wanted to live at any price. I
confess I might well have resented that blind, deaf fate, which, with no
apparent reason, seemed to have decided to crush me like a fly; but why
did I not stop at resentment? Why did I begin to live, knowing that it
was not worthwhile to begin? Why did I attempt to do what I knew to be
an impossibility? And yet I could not even read a book to the end; I
had given up reading. What is the good of reading, what is the good of
learning anything, for just six months? That thought has made me throw
aside a book more than once.

"Yes, that wall of Meyer's could tell a tale if it liked. There was no
spot on its dirty surface that I did not know by heart. Accursed wall!
and yet it is dearer to me than all the Pavlofsk trees!--That is--it
_would_ be dearer if it were not all the same to me, now!

"I remember now with what hungry interest I began to watch the lives of
other people--interest that I had never felt before! I used to wait for
Colia's arrival impatiently, for I was so ill myself, then, that I could
not leave the house. I so threw myself into every little detail of news,
and took so much interest in every report and rumour, that I believe I
became a regular gossip! I could not understand, among other things, how
all these people--with so much life in and before them--do not become
_rich_--and I don't understand it now. I remember being told of a poor
wretch I once knew, who had died of hunger. I was almost beside myself
with rage! I believe if I could have resuscitated him I would have done
so for the sole purpose of murdering him!

"Occasionally I was so much better that I could go out; but the streets
used to put me in such a rage that I would lock myself up for days
rather than go out, even if I were well enough to do so! I could
not bear to see all those preoccupied, anxious-looking creatures
continuously surging along the streets past me! Why are they always
anxious? What is the meaning of their eternal care and worry? It is
their wickedness, their perpetual detestable malice--that's what it
is--they are all full of malice, malice!

"Whose fault is it that they are all miserable, that they don't know how
to live, though they have fifty or sixty years of life before them? Why
did that fool allow himself to die of hunger with sixty years of unlived
life before him?

"And everyone of them shows his rags, his toil-worn hands, and yells in
his wrath: 'Here are we, working like cattle all our lives, and always
as hungry as dogs, and there are others who do not work, and are fat and
rich!' The eternal refrain! And side by side with them trots along some
wretched fellow who has known better days, doing light porter's work
from morn to night for a living, always blubbering and saying that
'his wife died because he had no money to buy medicine with,' and his
children dying of cold and hunger, and his eldest daughter gone to the
bad, and so on. Oh! I have no pity and no patience for these fools of
people. Why can't they be Rothschilds? Whose fault is it that a man has
not got millions of money like Rothschild? If he has life, all this must
be in his power! Whose fault is it that he does not know how to live his
life?

"Oh! it's all the same to me now--_now!_ But at that time I would soak my
pillow at night with tears of mortification, and tear at my blanket in
my rage and fury. Oh, how I longed at that time to be turned out--_me_,
eighteen years old, poor, half-clothed, turned out into the street,
quite alone, without lodging, without work, without a crust of bread,
without relations, without a single acquaintance, in some large
town--hungry, beaten (if you like), but in good health--and _then_ I would
show them--

"What would I show them?

"Oh, don't think that I have no sense of my own humiliation! I have
suffered already in reading so far. Which of you all does not think me a
fool at this moment--a young fool who knows nothing of life--forgetting
that to live as I have lived these last six months is to live longer
than grey-haired old men. Well, let them laugh, and say it is all
nonsense, if they please. They may say it is all fairy-tales, if they
like; and I have spent whole nights telling myself fairy-tales. I
remember them all. But how can I tell fairy-tales now? The time for them
is over. They amused me when I found that there was not even time for me
to learn the Greek grammar, as I wanted to do. 'I shall die before I get
to the syntax,' I thought at the first page--and threw the book under
the table. It is there still, for I forbade anyone to pick it up.

"If this 'Explanation' gets into anybody's hands, and they have patience
to read it through, they may consider me a madman, or a schoolboy, or,
more likely, a man condemned to die, who thought it only natural to
conclude that all men, excepting himself, esteem life far too lightly,
live it far too carelessly and lazily, and are, therefore, one and all,
unworthy of it. Well, I affirm that my reader is wrong again, for my
convictions have nothing to do with my sentence of death. Ask them, ask
any one of them, or all of them, what they mean by happiness! Oh, you
may be perfectly sure that if Columbus was happy, it was not after he
had discovered America, but when he was discovering it! You may be quite
sure that he reached the culminating point of his happiness three days
before he saw the New World with his actual eyes, when his mutinous
sailors wanted to tack about, and return to Europe! What did the New
World matter after all? Columbus had hardly seen it when he died, and
in reality he was entirely ignorant of what he had discovered. The
important thing is life--life and nothing else! What is any 'discovery'
whatever compared with the incessant, eternal discovery of life?

"But what is the use of talking? I'm afraid all this is so commonplace
that my confession will be taken for a schoolboy exercise--the work of
some ambitious lad writing in the hope of his work 'seeing the light';
or perhaps my readers will say that 'I had perhaps something to say, but
did not know how to express it.'

"Let me add to this that in every idea emanating from genius, or even in
every serious human idea--born in the human brain--there always remains
something--some sediment--which cannot be expressed to others, though
one wrote volumes and lectured upon it for five-and-thirty years. There
is always a something, a remnant, which will never come out from your
brain, but will remain there with you, and you alone, for ever and ever,
and you will die, perhaps, without having imparted what may be the very
essence of your idea to a single living soul.

"So that if I cannot now impart all that has tormented me for the last
six months, at all events you will understand that, having reached my
'last convictions,' I must have paid a very dear price for them. That
is what I wished, for reasons of my own, to make a point of in this my
'Explanation.'

"But let me resume."

VI.

"I will not deceive you. 'Reality' got me so entrapped in its meshes now
and again during the past six months, that I forgot my 'sentence' (or
perhaps I did not wish to think of it), and actually busied myself with
affairs.

"A word as to my circumstances. When, eight months since, I became
very ill, I threw up all my old connections and dropped all my old
companions. As I was always a gloomy, morose sort of individual, my
