screened off by a green curtain, which ran the length of the room, and
besides the sofa there stood by the table a large, soft easy chair, in
which Marya Timofyevna never sat, however. In the corner there was an
ikon as there had been in her old room, and a little lamp was burning
before it, and on the table were all her indispensable properties. The
pack of cards, the little looking-glass, the song-book, even a milk
loaf. Besides these there were two books with coloured pictures--one,
extracts from a popular book of travels, published for juvenile reading,
the other a collection of very light, edifying tales, for the most part
about the days of chivalry, intended for Christmas presents or school
reading. She had, too, an album of photographs of various sorts.

Marya Timofyevna was, of course, expecting the visitor, as the captain
had announced. But when Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went in, she was asleep,
half reclining on the sofa, propped on a woolwork cushion. Her visitor
closed the door after him noiselessly, and, standing still, scrutinised
the sleeping figure.

The captain had been romancing when he told Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch she
had been dressing herself up. She was wearing the same dark dress as on
Sunday at Varvara Petrovna's. Her hair was done up in the same little
close knot at the back of her head; her long thin neck was exposed
in the same way. The black shawl Varvara Petrovna had given her lay
carefully folded on the sofa. She was coarsely rouged and powdered as
before. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch did not stand there more than a minute.
She suddenly waked up, as though she were conscious of his eyes
fixed upon her; she opened her eyes, and quickly drew herself up.
But something strange must have happened to her visitor: he remained
standing at the same place by the door. With a fixed and searching
glance he looked mutely and persistently into her face. Perhaps that
look was too grim, perhaps there was an expression of aversion in it,
even a malignant enjoyment of her fright--if it were not a fancy left by
her dreams; but suddenly, after almost a moment of expectation, the poor
woman's face wore a look of absolute terror; it twitched convulsively;
she lifted her trembling hands and suddenly burst into tears, exactly
like a frightened child; in another moment she would have screamed. But
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch pulled himself together; his face changed in one
instant, and he went up to the table with the most cordial and amiable
smile.

"I'm sorry, Marya Timofyevna, I frightened you coming in suddenly when
you were asleep," he said, holding out his hand to her.

The sound of his caressing words produced their effect. Her fear
vanished, although she still looked at him with dismay, evidently trying
to understand something. She held out her hands timorously also. At last
a shy smile rose to her lips.

"How do you do, prince?" she whispered, looking at him strangely.

"You must have had a bad dream," he went on, with a still more friendly
and cordial smile.

"But how do you know that I was dreaming about that?" And again she
began trembling, and started back, putting up her hand as though to
protect herself, on the point of crying again. "Calm yourself. That's
enough. What are you afraid of? Surely you know me?" said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, trying to soothe her; but it was long before he
could succeed. She gazed at him dumbly with the same look of agonising
perplexity, with a painful idea in her poor brain, and she still seemed
to be trying to reach some conclusion. At one moment she dropped her
eyes, then suddenly scrutinised him in a rapid comprehensive glance. At
last, though not reassured, she seemed to come to a conclusion.

"Sit down beside me, please, that I may look at you thoroughly later
on," she brought out with more firmness, evidently with a new object.
"But don't be uneasy, I won't look at you now. I'll look down. Don't you
look at me either till I ask you to. Sit down," she added, with positive
impatience.

A new sensation was obviously growing stronger and stronger in her.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat down and waited. Rather a long silence
followed.

"H'm! It all seems so strange to me," she suddenly muttered almost
disdainfully. "Of course I was depressed by bad dreams, but why have I
dreamt of you looking like that?"

"Come, let's have done with dreams," he said impatiently, turning to her
in spite of her prohibition, and perhaps the same expression gleamed for
a moment in his eyes again. He saw that she several times wanted, very
much in fact, to look at him again, but that she obstinately controlled
herself and kept her eyes cast down.

"Listen, prince," she raised her voice suddenly, "listen prince...."

"Why do you turn away? Why don't you look at me? What's the object of
this farce?" he cried, losing patience.

But she seemed not to hear him.

"Listen, prince," she repeated for the third time in a resolute voice,
with a disagreeable, fussy expression. "When you told me in the carriage
that our marriage was going to be made public, I was alarmed at there
being an end to the mystery. Now I don't know. I've been thinking it all
over, and I see clearly that I'm not fit for it at all. I know how to
dress, and I could receive guests, perhaps. There's nothing much in
asking people to have a cup of tea, especially when there are footmen.
But what will people say though? I saw a great deal that Sunday morning
in that house. That pretty young lady looked at me all the time,
especially after you came in. It was you came in, wasn't it? Her
mother's simply an absurd worldly old woman. My Lebyadkin distinguished
himself too. I kept looking at the ceiling to keep from laughing; the
ceiling there is finely painted. His mother ought to be an abbess. I'm
afraid of her, though she did give me a black shawl. Of course, they
must all have come to strange conclusions about me. I wasn't vexed,
but I sat there, thinking what relation am I to them? Of course, from
a countess one doesn't expect any but spiritual qualities; for the
domestic ones she's got plenty of footmen; and also a little worldly
coquetry, so as to be able to entertain foreign travellers. But yet that
Sunday they did look upon me as hopeless. Only Dasha's an angel. I'm
awfully afraid they may wound _him_ by some careless allusion to me."

"Don't be afraid, and don't be uneasy," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
making a wry face.

"However, that doesn't matter to me, if he is a little ashamed of me,
for there will always be more pity than shame, though it differs with
people, of course. He knows, to be sure, that I ought rather to pity
them than they me."

"You seem to be very much offended with them, Marya Timofyevna?"

"I? Oh, no," she smiled with simple-hearted mirth. "Not at all. I looked
at you all, then. You were all angry, you were all quarrelling. They
meet together, and they don't know how to laugh from their hearts. So
much wealth and so little gaiety. It all disgusts me. Though I feel for
no one now except myself."

"I've heard that you've had a hard life with your brother without me?"

"Who told you that? It's nonsense. It's much worse now. Now my dreams
are not good, and my dreams are bad, because you've come. What have you
come for, I'd like to know. Tell me please?"

"Wouldn't you like to go back into the nunnery?"

"I knew they'd suggest the nunnery again. Your nunnery is a fine marvel
for me! And why should I go to it? What should I go for now? I'm all
alone in the world now. It's too late for me to begin a third life."

"You seem very angry about something. Surely you're not afraid that I've
left off loving you?"

"I'm not troubling about you at all. I'm afraid that I may leave off
loving somebody."

She laughed contemptuously.

"I must have done him some great wrong," she added suddenly, as it were
to herself, "only I don't know what I've done wrong; that's always what
troubles me. Always, always, for the last five years. I've been afraid
day and night that I've done him some wrong. I've prayed and prayed and
always thought of the great wrong I'd done him. And now it turns out it
was true."

"What's turned out?"

"I'm only afraid whether there's something on _his_ side," she went on,
not answering his question, not hearing it in fact. "And then, again, he
couldn't get on with such horrid people. The countess would have liked
to eat me, though she did make me sit in the carriage beside her.
They're all in the plot. Surely he's not betrayed me?" (Her chin and
lips were twitching.) "Tell me, have you read about Grishka Otrepyev,
how he was cursed in seven cathedrals?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch did not speak.

"But I'll turn round now and look at you." She seemed to decide
suddenly. "You turn to me, too, and look at me, but more attentively. I
want to make sure for the last time."

"I've been looking at you for a long time."

"H'm!" said Marya Timofyevna, looking at him intently. "You've grown
much fatter."

She wanted to say something more, but suddenly, for the third time,
the same terror instantly distorted her face, and again she drew back,
putting her hand up before her.

"What's the matter with you?" cried Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, almost
enraged.

But her panic lasted only one instant, her face worked with a sort of
strange smile, suspicious and unpleasant.

"I beg you, prince, get up and come in," she brought out suddenly, in a
firm, emphatic voice.

"Come in? Where am I to come in?"

"I've been fancying for five years how _he_ would come in. Get up and
go out of the door into the other room. I'll sit as though I weren't
expecting anything, and I'll take up a book, and suddenly you'll come in
after five years' travelling. I want to see what it will be like."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch ground his teeth, and muttered something to
himself.

"Enough," he said, striking the table with his open hand. "I beg you to
listen to me, Marya Timofyevna. Do me the favour to concentrate all your
attention if you can. You're not altogether mad, you know!" he broke out
impatiently. "Tomorrow I shall make our marriage public. You never will
live in a palace, get that out of your head. Do you want to live with
me for the rest of your life, only very far away from here? In the
mountains in Switzerland, there's a place there.... Don't be afraid.
I'll never abandon you or put you in a madhouse. I shall have money
enough to live without asking anyone's help. You shall have a servant,
you shall do no work at all. Everything you want that's possible shall
be got for you. You shall pray, go where you like, and do what you like.
I won't touch you. I won't go away from the place myself at all. If you
like, I won't speak to you all my life, or if you like, you can tell
me your stories every evening as you used to do in Petersburg in the
corners. I'll read aloud to you if you like. But it must be all your
life in the same place, and that place is a gloomy one. Will you? Are
you ready? You won't regret it, torment me with tears and curses, will
you?"

She listened with extreme curiosity, and for a long time she was silent,
thinking.

"It all seems incredible to me," she said at last, ironically and
disdainfully. "I might live for forty years in those mountains," she
laughed.

"What of it? Let's live forty years then..." said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, scowling.

"H'm! I won't come for anything."

"Not even with me?"

"And what are you that I should go with you? I'm to sit on a mountain
beside him for forty years on end--a pretty story! And upon my word,
how long-suffering people have become nowadays! No, it cannot be that a
falcon has become an owl. My prince is not like that!" she said, raising
her head proudly and triumphantly.

Light seemed to dawn upon him.

"What makes you call me a prince, and... for whom do you take me?" he
asked quickly.

"Why, aren't you the prince?"

"I never have been one."

"So yourself, yourself, you tell me straight to my face that you're not
the prince?"

"I tell you I never have been."

"Good Lord!" she cried, clasping her hands. "I was ready to expect
anything from _his_ enemies, but such insolence, never! Is he alive?" she
shrieked in a frenzy, turning upon Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. "Have you
killed him? Confess!"

"Whom do you take me for?" he cried, jumping up from his chair with
a distorted face; but it was not easy now to frighten her. She was
triumphant.

"Who can tell who you are and where you've sprung from? Only my heart,
my heart had misgivings all these five years, of all the intrigues. And
I've been sitting here wondering what blind owl was making up to me? No,
my dear, you're a poor actor, worse than Lebyadkin even. Give my humble
greetings to the countess and tell her to send some one better than you.
Has she hired you, tell me? Have they given you a place in her kitchen
out of charity? I see through your deception. I understand you all,
every one of you."

He seized her firmly above the elbow; she laughed in his face.

"You're like him, very like, perhaps you're a relation--you're a sly
lot! Only mine is a bright falcon and a prince, and you're an owl, and
a shopman! Mine will bow down to God if it pleases him, and won't if it
doesn't. And Shatushka (he's my dear, my darling!) slapped you on the
cheeks, my Lebyadkin told me. And what were you afraid of then, when you
came in? Who had frightened you then? When I saw your mean face after
I'd fallen down and you picked me up--it was like a worm crawling into
my heart. It's not he, I thought, not _he!_ My falcon would never have
been ashamed of me before a fashionable young lady. Oh heavens! That
alone kept me happy for those five years that my falcon was living
somewhere beyond the mountains, soaring, gazing at the sun.... Tell
me, you impostor, have you got much by it? Did you need a big bribe to
consent? I wouldn't have given you a farthing. Ha ha ha! Ha ha!..."

"Ugh, idiot!" snarled Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, still holding her tight
by the arm.

"Go away, impostor!" she shouted peremptorily. "I'm the wife of my
prince; I'm not afraid of your knife!"

"Knife!"

"Yes, knife, you've a knife in your pocket. You thought I was asleep but
I saw it. When you came in just now you took out your knife!"

"What are you saying, unhappy creature? What dreams you have!" he
exclaimed, pushing her away from him with all his might, so that her
head and shoulders fell painfully against the sofa. He was rushing away;
but she at once flew to overtake him, limping and hopping, and though
Lebyadkin, panic-stricken, held her back with all his might, she
succeeded in shouting after him into the darkness, shrieking and
laughing:

"A curse on you, Grishka Otrepyev!"


IV

"A knife, a knife," he repeated with uncontrollable anger, striding
along through the mud and puddles, without picking his way. It is true
that at moments he had a terrible desire to laugh aloud frantically; but
for some reason he controlled himself and restrained his laughter. He
recovered himself only on the bridge, on the spot where Fedka had met
him that evening. He found the man lying in wait for him again. Seeing
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch he took off his cap, grinned gaily, and
began babbling briskly and merrily about something. At first Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch walked on without stopping, and for some time did not
even listen to the tramp who was pestering him again. He was suddenly
struck by the thought that he had entirely forgotten him, and had
forgotten him at the very moment when he himself was repeating, "A
knife, a knife." He seized the tramp by the collar and gave vent to
his pent-up rage by flinging him violently against the bridge. For one
instant the man thought of fighting, but almost at once realising that
compared with his adversary, who had fallen upon him unawares, he was
no better than a wisp of straw, he subsided and was silent, without
offering any resistance. Crouching on the ground with his elbows crooked
behind his back, the wily tramp calmly waited for what would happen
next, apparently quite incredulous of danger. He was right in his
reckoning. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had already with his left hand taken
off his thick scarf to tie his prisoner's arms, but suddenly, for some
reason, he abandoned him, and shoved him away. The man instantly sprang
on to his feet, turned round, and a short, broad boot-knife suddenly
gleamed in his hand.

"Away with that knife; put it away, at once!" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
commanded with an impatient gesture, and the knife vanished as
instantaneously as it had appeared.

Without speaking again or turning round, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went on
his way. But the persistent vagabond did not leave him even now, though
now, it is true, he did not chatter, and even respectfully kept his
distance, a full step behind.

They crossed the bridge like this and came out on to the river bank,
turning this time to the left, again into a long deserted back street,
which led to the centre of the town by a shorter way than going through
Bogoyavlensky Street.

"Is it true, as they say, that you robbed a church in the district the
other day?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked suddenly.

"I went in to say my prayers in the first place," the tramp answered,
sedately and respectfully as though nothing had happened; more than
sedately, in fact, almost with dignity. There was no trace of his
former "friendly" familiarity. All that was to be seen was a serious,
business-like man, who had indeed been gratuitously insulted, but who
was capable of overlooking an insult.

"But when the Lord led me there," he went on, "ech, I thought what a
heavenly abundance! It was all owing to my helpless state, as in our
way of life there's no doing without assistance. And, now, God be my
witness, sir, it was my own loss. The Lord punished me for my sins, and
what with the censer and the deacon's halter, I only got twelve roubles
altogether. The chin setting of St. Nikolay of pure silver went for next
to nothing. They said it was plated."

"You killed the watchman?"

"That is, I cleared the place out together with that watchman, but
afterwards, next morning, by the river, we fell to quarrelling which
should carry the sack. I sinned, I did lighten his load for him."

"Well, you can rob and murder again."

"That's the very advice Pyotr Stepanovitch gives me, in the very
same words, for he's uncommonly mean and hard-hearted about helping a
fellow-creature. And what's more, he hasn't a ha'p'orth of belief in the
Heavenly Creator, who made us out of earthly clay; but he says it's all
the work of nature even to the last beast. He doesn't understand either
that with our way of life it's impossible for us to get along without
friendly assistance. If you begin to talk to him he looks like a
sheep at the water; it makes one wonder. Would you believe, at Captain
Lebyadkin's, out yonder, whom your honour's just been visiting, when he
was living at Filipov's, before you came, the door stood open all night
long.--He'd be drunk and sleeping like the dead, and his money dropping
out of his pockets all over the floor. I've chanced to see it with
my own eyes, for in our way of life it's impossible to live without
assistance...."

"How do you mean with your own eyes? Did you go in at night then?"

"Maybe I did go in, but no one knows of it."

"Why didn't you kill him?"

"Reckoning it out, I steadied myself. For once having learned for sure
that I can always get one hundred and fifty roubles, why should I go so
far when I can get fifteen hundred roubles, if I only bide my time. For
Captain Lebyadkin (I've heard him with my own ears) had great hopes of
you when he was drunk; and there isn't a tavern here--not the lowest
pot-house--where he hasn't talked about it when he was in that state.
So that hearing it from many lips, I began, too, to rest all my hopes
on your excellency. I speak to you, sir, as to my father, or my own
brother; for Pyotr Stepanovitch will never learn that from me, and not
a soul in the world. So won't your excellency spare me three roubles in
your kindness? You might set my mind at rest, so that I might know the
real truth; for we can't get on without assistance."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch laughed aloud, and taking out his purse, in
which he had as much as fifty roubles, in small notes, threw him one
note out of the bundle, then a second, a third, a fourth. Fedka flew to
catch them in the air. The notes dropped into the mud, and he snatched
them up crying, "Ech! ech!" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch finished by flinging
the whole bundle at him, and, still laughing, went on down the street,
this time alone. The tramp remained crawling on his knees in the mud,
looking for the notes which were blown about by the wind and soaking in
the puddles, and for an hour after his spasmodic cries of "Ech! ech!"
were still to be heard in the darkness.




CHAPTER III. THE DUEL

THE NEXT DAY, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the duel took place as
arranged. Things were hastened forward by Gaganov's obstinate desire to
fight at all costs. He did not understand his adversary's conduct,
and was in a fury. For a whole month he had been insulting him with
impunity, and had so far been unable to make him lose patience. What he
wanted was a challenge on the part of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, as he had
not himself any direct pretext for challenging him. His secret motive
for it, that is, his almost morbid hatred of Stavrogin for the insult to
his family four years before, he was for some reason ashamed to confess.
And indeed he regarded this himself as an impossible pretext for a
challenge, especially in view of the humble apology offered by Nikolay
Stavrogin twice already. He privately made up his mind that Stavrogin
was a shameless coward; and could not understand how he could have
accepted Shatov's blow. So he made up his mind at last to send him
the extraordinarily rude letter that had finally roused Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch himself to propose a meeting. Having dispatched this
letter the day before, he awaited a challenge with feverish impatience,
and while morbidly reckoning the chances at one moment with hope and
at the next with despair, he got ready for any emergency by securing a
second, to wit, Mavriky Nikolaevitch Drozdov, who was a friend of his,
an old schoolfellow, a man for whom he had a great respect. So when
Kirillov came next morning at nine o'clock with his message he found
things in readiness. All the apologies and unheard-of condescension of
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch were at once, at the first word, rejected with
extraordinary exasperation. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had only been made
acquainted with the position of affairs the evening before, opened his
mouth with surprise at such incredible concessions, and would have urged
a reconciliation, but seeing that Gaganov, guessing his intention, was
almost trembling in his chair, refrained, and said nothing. If it had
not been for the promise given to his old schoolfellow he would have
retired immediately; he only remained in the hope of being some help on
the scene of action. Kirillov repeated the challenge. All the conditions
of the encounter made by Stavrogin were accepted on the spot, without
the faintest objection. Only one addition was made, and that a ferocious
one. If the first shots had no decisive effect, they were to fire again,
and if the second encounter were inconclusive, it was to be followed by
a third. Kirillov frowned, objected to the third encounter, but gaining
nothing by his efforts agreed on the condition, however, that three
should be the limit, and that "a fourth encounter was out of the
question." This was conceded. Accordingly at two o'clock in the
afternoon the meeting took place at Brykov, that is, in a little
copse in the outskirts of the town, lying between Skvoreshniki and the
Shpigulin factory. The rain of the previous night was over, but it was
damp, grey, and windy. Low, ragged, dingy clouds moved rapidly across
the cold sky. The tree-tops roared with a deep droning sound, and
creaked on their roots; it was a melancholy morning.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch and Gaganov arrived on the spot in a smart
char-à-banc with a pair of horses driven by the latter. They were
accompanied by a groom. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and Kirillov arrived
almost at the same instant. They were not driving, they were on
horseback, and were also followed by a mounted servant. Kirillov, who
had never mounted a horse before, sat up boldly, erect in the saddle,
grasping in his right hand the heavy box of pistols which he would not
entrust to the servant. In his inexperience he was continually with his
left hand tugging at the reins, which made the horse toss his head and
show an inclination to rear. This, however, seemed to cause his rider no
uneasiness. Gaganov, who was morbidly suspicious and always ready to be
deeply offended, considered their coming on horseback as a fresh insult
to himself, inasmuch as it showed that his opponents were too confident
of success, since they had not even thought it necessary to have a
carriage in case of being wounded and disabled. He got out of his
char-à-banc, yellow with anger, and felt that his hands were trembling,
as he told Mavriky Nikolaevitch. He made no response at all to Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch's bow, and turned away. The seconds cast lots. The lot
fell on Kirillov's pistols. They measured out the barrier and placed the
combatants. The servants with the carriage and horses were moved
back three hundred paces. The weapons were loaded and handed to the
combatants.

I'm sorry that I have to tell my story more quickly and have no time
for descriptions. But I can't refrain from some comments. Mavriky
Nikolaevitch was melancholy and preoccupied. Kirillov, on the other
hand, was perfectly calm and unconcerned, very exact over the details
of the duties he had undertaken, but without the slightest fussiness or
even curiosity as to the issue of the fateful contest that was so near
at hand. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was paler than usual. He was rather
lightly dressed in an overcoat and a white beaver hat. He seemed very
tired, he frowned from time to time, and seemed to feel it superfluous
to conceal his ill-humour. But Gaganov was at this moment more worthy
of mention than anyone, so that it is quite impossible not to say a few
words about him in particular.


II

I have hitherto not had occasion to describe his appearance. He was a
tall man of thirty-three, and well fed, as the common folk express it,
almost fat, with lank flaxen hair, and with features which might be
called handsome. He had retired from the service with the rank of
colonel, and if he had served till he reached the rank of general he
would have been even more impressive in that position, and would very
likely have become an excellent fighting general.

I must add, as characteristic of the man, that the chief cause of
his leaving the army was the thought of the family disgrace which had
haunted him so painfully since the insult paid to his father by Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch four years before at the club. He conscientiously
considered it dishonourable to remain in the service, and was inwardly
persuaded that he was contaminating the regiment and his companions,
although they knew nothing of the incident. It's true that he had once
before been disposed to leave the army long before the insult to his
father, and on quite other grounds, but he had hesitated. Strange as it
is to write, the original design, or rather desire, to leave the army
was due to the proclamation of the 19th of February of the emancipation
of the serfs. Gaganov, who was one of the richest landowners in the
province, and who had not lost very much by the emancipation, and was,
moreover, quite capable of understanding the humanity of the reform and
its economic advantages, suddenly felt himself personally insulted by
the proclamation. It was something unconscious, a feeling; but was
all the stronger for being unrecognised. He could not bring himself,
however, to take any decisive step till his father's death. But he began
to be well known for his "gentlemanly" ideas to many persons of high
position in Petersburg, with whom he strenuously kept up connections. He
was secretive and self-contained. Another characteristic: he belonged to
that strange section of the nobility, still surviving in Russia, who
set an extreme value on their pure and ancient lineage, and take it too
seriously. At the same time he could not endure Russian history, and,
indeed, looked upon Russian customs in general as more or less piggish.
Even in his childhood, in the special military school for the sons of
particularly wealthy and distinguished families in which he had the
privilege of being educated, from first to last certain poetic notions
were deeply rooted in his mind. He loved castles, chivalry; all the
theatrical part of it. He was ready to cry with shame that in the days
of the Moscow Tsars the sovereign had the right to inflict corporal
punishment on the Russian boyars, and blushed at the contrast. This
stiff and extremely severe man, who had a remarkable knowledge of
military science and performed his duties admirably, was at heart a
dreamer. It was said that he could speak at meetings and had the gift of
language, but at no time during the thirty-three years of his life had
he spoken. Even in the distinguished circles in Petersburg, in which
he had moved of late, he behaved with extraordinary haughtiness.
His meeting in Petersburg with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, who had just
returned from abroad, almost sent him out of his mind. At the present
moment, standing at the barrier, he was terribly uneasy. He kept
imagining that the duel would somehow not come off; the least delay
threw him into a tremor. There was an expression of anguish in his face
when Kirillov, instead of giving the signal for them to fire, began
suddenly speaking, only for form, indeed, as he himself explained aloud.

"Simply as a formality, now that you have the pistols in your hands,
and I must give the signal, I ask you for the last time, will you not be
reconciled? It's the duty of a second."

As though to spite him, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had till then kept
silence, although he had been reproaching himself all day for his
compliance and acquiescence, suddenly caught up Kirillov's thought and
began to speak:

"I entirely agree with Mr. Kirillov's words.... This idea that
reconciliation is impossible at the barrier is a prejudice, only
suitable for Frenchmen. Besides, with your leave, I don't understand
what the offence is. I've been wanting to say so for a long time...
because every apology is offered, isn't it?"

He flushed all over. He had rarely spoken so much, and with such
excitement.

"I repeat again my offer to make every possible apology," Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch interposed hurriedly.

"This is impossible," shouted Gaganov furiously, addressing Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, and stamping with rage. "Explain to this man," he pointed
with his pistol at Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, "if you're my second and not
my enemy, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, that such overtures only aggravate the
insult. He feels it impossible to be insulted by me!... He feels it no
disgrace to walk away from me at the barrier! What does he take me for,
after that, do you think?... And you, you, my second, too! You're simply
irritating me that I may miss."

He stamped again. There were flecks of foam on his lips.

"Negotiations are over. I beg you to listen to the signal!" Kirillov
shouted at the top of his voice. "One! Two! Three!"

At the word "Three" the combatants took aim at one another. Gaganov at
once raised his pistol, and at the fifth or sixth step he fired. For a
second he stood still, and, making sure that he had missed, advanced to
the barrier. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch advanced too, raising his pistol,
but somehow holding it very high, and fired, almost without taking aim.
Then he took out his handkerchief and bound it round the little finger
of his right hand. Only then they saw that Gaganov had not missed him
completely, but the bullet had only grazed the fleshy part of his finger
without touching the bone; it was only a slight scratch. Kirillov at
once announced that the duel would go on, unless the combatants were
satisfied.

"I declare," said Gaganov hoarsely (his throat felt parched), again
addressing Mavriky Nikolaevitch, "that this man," again he pointed
in Stavrogin's direction, "fired in the air on purpose...
intentionally.... This is an insult again.... He wants to make the
duel impossible!"

"I have the right to fire as I like so long as I keep the rules,"
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asserted resolutely.

"No, he hasn't! Explain it to him! Explain it!" cried Gaganov.

"I'm in complete agreement with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch," proclaimed
Kirillov.

"Why does he spare me?" Gaganov raged, not hearing him. "I despise his
mercy.... I spit on it.... I..."

"I give you my word that I did not intend to insult you," cried Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch impatiently. "I shot high because I don't want to kill
anyone else, either you or anyone else. It's nothing to do with you
personally. It's true that I don't consider myself insulted, and I'm
sorry that angers you. But I don't allow any one to interfere with my
rights."

"If he's so afraid of bloodshed, ask him why he challenged me," yelled
Gaganov, still addressing Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

"How could he help challenging you?" said Kirillov, intervening. "You
wouldn't listen to anything. How was one to get rid of you?"

"I'll only mention one thing," observed Mavriky Nikolaevitch, pondering
the matter with painful effort. "If a combatant declares beforehand that
he will fire in the air the duel certainly cannot go on... for obvious
and... delicate reasons."

"I haven't declared that I'll fire in the air every time," cried
Stavrogin, losing all patience. "You don't know what's in my mind or how
I intend to fire again.... I'm not restricting the duel at all."

"In that case the encounter can go on," said Mavriky Nikolaevitch to
Gaganov.

"Gentlemen, take your places," Kirillov commanded. Again they advanced,
again Gaganov missed and Stavrogin fired into the air. There might have
been a dispute as to his firing into the air. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
might have flatly declared that he'd fired properly, if he had not
admitted that he had missed intentionally. He did not aim straight at
the sky or at the trees, but seemed to aim at his adversary, though as
he pointed the pistol the bullet flew a yard above his hat. The second
time the shot was even lower, even less like an intentional miss.
Nothing would have convinced Gaganov now.

"Again!" he muttered, grinding his teeth. "No matter! I've been
challenged and I'll make use of my rights. I'll fire a third time...
whatever happens."

"You have full right to do so," Kirillov rapped out. Mavriky
Nikolaevitch said nothing. The opponents were placed a third time, the
signal was given. This time Gaganov went right up to the barrier, and
began from there taking aim, at a distance of twelve paces. His hand
was trembling too much to take good aim. Stavrogin stood with his pistol
lowered and awaited his shot without moving.

"Too long; you've been aiming too long!" Kirillov shouted impetuously.
"Fire! Fire!"

But the shot rang out, and this time Stavrogin's white beaver hat flew
off. The aim had been fairly correct. The crown of the hat was pierced
very low down; a quarter of an inch lower and all would have been over.
Kirillov picked up the hat and handed it to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"Fire; don't detain your adversary!" cried Mavriky Nikolaevitch in
extreme agitation, seeing that Stavrogin seemed to have forgotten to
fire, and was examining the hat with Kirillov. Stavrogin started, looked
at Gaganov, turned round and this time, without the slightest regard for
punctilio, fired to one side, into the copse. The duel was over. Gaganov
stood as though overwhelmed. Mavriky Nikolaevitch went up and began
saying something to him, but he did not seem to understand. Kirillov
took off his hat as he went away, and nodded to Mavriky Nikolaevitch.
But Stavrogin forgot his former politeness. When he had shot into the
copse he did not even turn towards the barrier. He handed his pistol to
Kirillov and hastened towards the horses. His face looked angry; he did
not speak. Kirillov, too, was silent. They got on their horses and set
off at a gallop.



III

"Why don't you speak?" he called impatiently to Kirillov, when they were
not far from home.

"What do you want?" replied the latter, almost slipping off his horse,
which was rearing.

Stavrogin restrained himself.

"I didn't mean to insult that... fool, and I've insulted him again," he
said quietly.

"Yes, you've insulted him again," Kirillov jerked out, "and besides,
he's not a fool."

"I've done all I can, anyway."

"No."

"What ought I to have done?"

"Not have challenged him."

"Accept another blow in the face?"

"Yes, accept another."

"I can't understand anything now," said Stavrogin wrathfully. "Why does
every one expect of me something not expected from anyone else? Why am
I to put up with what no one else puts up with, and undertake burdens no
one else can bear?"

"I thought you were seeking a burden yourself."

"I seek a burden?"

"Yes."

"You've... seen that?"

"Yes."

"Is it so noticeable?"

"Yes."

There was silence for a moment. Stavrogin had a very preoccupied face.
He was almost impressed.

"I didn't aim because I didn't want to kill anyone. There was nothing
more in it, I assure you," he said hurriedly, and with agitation, as
though justifying himself.

"You ought not to have offended him."

"What ought I to have done then?"

"You ought to have killed him."

"Are you sorry I didn't kill him?"

"I'm not sorry for anything. I thought you really meant to kill him. You
don't know what you're seeking."

"I seek a burden," laughed Stavrogin.

"If you didn't want blood yourself, why did you give him a chance to
kill you?"

"If I hadn't challenged him, he'd have killed me simply, without a
duel."

"That's not your affair. Perhaps he wouldn't have killed you."

"Only have beaten me?"

"That's not your business. Bear your burden. Or else there's no merit."

"Hang your merit. I don't seek anyone's approbation."

"I thought you were seeking it," Kirillov commented with terrible
unconcern.

They rode into the courtyard of the house.

"Do you care to come in?" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"No; I'm going home. Good-bye."

He got off the horse and took his box of pistols under his arm.

"Anyway, you're not angry with me?" said Stavrogin, holding out his hand
to him.

"Not in the least," said Kirillov, turning round to shake hands with
him. "If my burden's light it's because it's from nature; perhaps your
burden's heavier because that's your nature. There's no need to be much
ashamed; only a little."

"I know I'm a worthless character, and I don't pretend to be a strong
one."

"You'd better not; you're not a strong person. Come and have tea."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went into the house, greatly perturbed.


IV

He learned at once from Alexey Yegorytch that Varvara Petrovna had
been very glad to hear that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had gone out for a
ride--the first time he had left the house after eight days' illness.
She had ordered the carriage, and had driven out alone for a breath of
fresh air "according to the habit of the past, as she had forgotten for
the last eight days what it meant to breathe fresh air."

"Alone, or with Darya Pavlovna?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch interrupted the
old man with a rapid question, and he scowled when he heard that Darya
Pavlovna "had declined to go abroad on account of indisposition and was
in her rooms."

"Listen, old man," he said, as though suddenly making up his mind. "Keep
watch over her all to-day, and if you notice her coming to me, stop her
at once, and tell her that I can't see her for a few days at least...
that I ask her not to come myself.... I'll let her know myself, when the
time comes. Do you hear?"

"I'll tell her, sir," said Alexey Yegorytch, with distress in his voice,
dropping his eyes.

"Not till you see clearly she's meaning to come and see me of herself,
though."

"Don't be afraid, sir, there shall be no mistake. Your interviews have
all passed through me, hitherto. You've always turned to me for help."

"I know. Not till she comes of herself, anyway. Bring me some tea, if
you can, at once."

The old man had hardly gone out, when almost at the same instant the
door reopened, and Darya Pavlovna appeared in the doorway. Her eyes were
tranquil, though her face was pale.

"Where have you come from?" exclaimed Stavrogin.

"I was standing there, and waiting for him to go out, to come in to
you. I heard the order you gave him, and when he came out just now I hid
round the corner, on the right, and he didn't notice me."

"I've long meant to break off with you, Dasha... for a while... for the
present. I couldn't see you last night, in spite of your note. I meant
to write to you myself, but I don't know how to write," he added with
vexation, almost as though with disgust.

"I thought myself that we must break it off. Varvara Petrovna is too
suspicious of our relations."

"Well, let her be."

"She mustn't be worried. So now we part till the end comes."

"You still insist on expecting the end?"

"Yes, I'm sure of it."

"But nothing in the world ever has an end."

"This will have an end. Then call me. I'll come. Now, good-bye."

"And what sort of end will it be?" smiled Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"You're not wounded, and... have not shed blood?" she asked, not
answering his question.

"It was stupid. I didn't kill anyone. Don't be uneasy. However, you'll
hear all about it to-day from every one. I'm not quite well."

"I'm going. The announcement of the marriage won't be to-day?" she added
irresolutely.

"It won't be to-day, and it won't be to-morrow. I can't say about the
day after to-morrow. Perhaps we shall all be dead, and so much the
better. Leave me alone, leave me alone, do."

"You won't ruin that other... mad girl?"

"I won't ruin either of the mad creatures. It seems to be the sane I'm
ruining. I'm so vile and loathsome, Dasha, that I might really send for
you, 'at the latter end,' as you say. And in spite of your sanity you'll
come. Why will you be your own ruin?"

"I know that at the end I shall be the only one left you, and... I'm
waiting for that."

"And what if I don't send for you after all, but run away from you?"

"That can't be. You will send for me."

"There's a great deal of contempt for me in that."

"You know that there's not only contempt."

"Then there is contempt, anyway?"

"I used the wrong word. God is my witness, it's my greatest wish that
you may never have need of me."

"One phrase is as good as another. I should also have wished not to have
ruined you."

"You can never, anyhow, be my ruin; and you know that yourself, better
than anyone," Darya Pavlovna said, rapidly and resolutely. "If I don't
come to you I shall be a sister of mercy, a nurse, shall wait upon the
sick, or go selling the gospel. I've made up my mind to that. I cannot
be anyone's wife. I can't live in a house like this, either. That's not
what I want.... You know all that."

"No, I never could tell what you want. It seems to me that you're
interested in me, as some veteran nurses get specially interested in
some particular invalid in comparison with the others, or still more,
like some pious old women who frequent funerals and find one corpse more
attractive than another. Why do you look at me so strangely?"

"Are you very ill?" she asked sympathetically, looking at him in a
peculiar way. "Good heavens! And this man wants to do without me!"

"Listen, Dasha, now I'm always seeing phantoms. One devil offered me
yesterday, on the bridge, to murder Lebyadkin and Marya Timofyevna, to
settle the marriage difficulty, and to cover up all traces. He asked me
to give him three roubles on account, but gave me to understand that
the whole operation wouldn't cost less than fifteen hundred. Wasn't he a
calculating devil! A regular shopkeeper. Ha ha!"

"But you're fully convinced that it was an hallucination?"

"Oh, no; not a bit an hallucination! It was simply Fedka the convict,
the robber who escaped from prison. But that's not the point. What do
you suppose I did! I gave him all I had, everything in my purse, and now
he's sure I've given him that on account!"

"You met him at night, and he made such a suggestion? Surely you must
see that you're being caught in their nets on every side!"

"Well, let them be. But you've got some question at the tip of your
tongue, you know. I see it by your eyes," he added with a resentful and
irritable smile.

Dasha was frightened.

"I've no question at all, and no doubt whatever; you'd better be quiet!"
she cried in dismay, as though waving off his question.

"Then you're convinced that I won't go to Fedka's little shop?"

"Oh, God!" she cried, clasping her hands. "Why do you torture me like
this?"

"Oh, forgive me my stupid joke. I must be picking up bad manners from
them. Do you know, ever since last night I feel awfully inclined to
laugh, to go on laughing continually for ever so long. It's as though
I must explode with laughter. It's like an illness.... Oh! my mother's
coming in. I always know by the rumble when her carriage has stopped at
the entrance."

Dasha seized his hand.

"God save you from your demon, and... call me, call me quickly!"

"Oh! a fine demon! It's simply a little nasty, scrofulous imp, with a
cold in his head, one of the unsuccessful ones. But you have something
you don't dare to say again, Dasha?"

She looked at him with pain and reproach, and turned towards the door.

"Listen," he called after her, with a malignant and distorted smile.
"If... Yes, if, in one word, if... you understand, even if I did go to
that little shop, and if I called you after that--would you come then?"

She went out, hiding her face in her hands, and neither turning nor
answering.

"She will come even after the shop," he whispered, thinking a moment,
and an expression of scornful disdain came into his face. "A nurse!
H'm!... but perhaps that's what I want."




CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION

The impression made on the whole neighbourhood by the story of the duel,
which was rapidly noised abroad, was particularly remarkable from the
unanimity with which every one hastened to take up the cudgels for
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. Many of his former enemies declared themselves
his friends. The chief reason for this change of front in public opinion
was chiefly due to one person, who had hitherto not expressed her
opinion, but who now very distinctly uttered a few words, which at
