
Be at Kirillov's directly, I'll come.... It's absolutely necessary
for me to see you!..."

"It isn't necessary for me," Stavrogin cut him short.

"Stavrogin will be there," Kirillov said finally. "Stavrogin, it is
necessary for you. I will show you that there."

They went out.




CHAPTER VIII. IVAN THE TSAREVITCH

They had gone. Pyotr Stepanovitch was about to rush back to the meeting
to bring order into chaos, but probably reflecting that it wasn't worth
bothering about, left everything, and two minutes later was flying after
the other two. On the way he remembered a short cut to Filipov's house.
He rushed along it, up to his knees in mud, and did in fact arrive at
the very moment when Stavrogin and Kirillov were coming in at the gate.

"You here already?" observed Kirillov. "That's good. Come in."

"How is it you told us you lived alone," asked Stavrogin, passing a
boiling samovar in the passage.

"You will see directly who it is I live with," muttered Kirillov. "Go
in."

They had hardly entered when Verhovensky at once took out of his pocket
the anonymous letter he had taken from Lembke, and laid it before
Stavrogin. They all then sat down. Stavrogin read the letter in silence.

"Well?" he asked.

"That scoundrel will do as he writes," Verhovensky explained. "So, as
he is under your control, tell me how to act. I assure you he may go to
Lembke to-morrow."

"Well, let him go."

"Let him go! And when we can prevent him, too!"

"You are mistaken. He is not dependent on me. Besides, I don't care; he
doesn't threaten me in any way; he only threatens you."

"You too."

"I don't think so."

"But there are other people who may not spare you. Surely you understand
that? Listen, Stavrogin. This is only playing with words. Surely you
don't grudge the money?"

"Why, would it cost money?"

"It certainly would; two thousand or at least fifteen hundred. Give it
to me to-morrow or even to-day, and to-morrow evening I'll send him to
Petersburg for you. That's just what he wants. If you like, he can take
Marya Timofyevna. Note that."

There was something distracted about him. He spoke, as it were, without
caution, and he did not reflect on his words. Stavrogin watched him,
wondering.

"I've no reason to send Marya Timofyevna away."

"Perhaps you don't even want to," Pyotr Stepanovitch smiled ironically.

"Perhaps I don't."

"In short, will there be the money or not?" he cried with angry
impatience, and as it were peremptorily, to Stavrogin. The latter
scrutinised him gravely. "There won't be the money."

"Look here, Stavrogin! You know something, or have done something
already! You are going it!"

His face worked, the corners of his mouth twitched, and he suddenly
laughed an unprovoked and irrelevant laugh.

"But you've had money from your father for the estate," Stavrogin
observed calmly. "Maman sent you six or eight thousand for Stepan
Trofimovitch. So you can pay the fifteen hundred out of your own money.
I don't care to pay for other people. I've given a lot as it is.
It annoys me...." He smiled himself at his own words. "Ah, you are
beginning to joke!"

Stavrogin got up from his chair. Verhovensky instantly jumped up too,
and mechanically stood with his back to the door as though barring the
way to him. Stavrogin had already made a motion to push him aside and go
out, when he stopped short.

"I won't give up Shatov to you," he said. Pyotr Stepanovitch started.
They looked at one another.

"I told you this evening why you needed Shatov's blood," said Stavrogin,
with flashing eyes. "It's the cement you want to bind your groups
together with. You drove Shatov away cleverly just now. You knew very
well that he wouldn't promise not to inform and he would have thought it
mean to lie to you. But what do you want with me? What do you want with
me? Ever since we met abroad you won't let me alone. The explanation
you've given me so far was simply raving. Meanwhile you are driving
at my giving Lebyadkin fifteen hundred roubles, so as to give Fedka an
opportunity to murder him. I know that you think I want my wife murdered
too. You think to tie my hands by this crime, and have me in your power.
That's it, isn't it? What good will that be to you? What the devil do
you want with me? Look at me. Once for all, am I the man for you? And
let me alone."

"Has Fedka been to you himself?" Verhovensky asked breathlessly.

"Yes, he came. His price is fifteen hundred too.... But here; he'll
repeat it himself. There he stands." Stavrogin stretched out his hand.

Pyotr Stepanovitch turned round quickly. A new figure, Fedka, wearing a
sheep-skin coat, but without a cap, as though he were at home, stepped
out of the darkness in the doorway. He stood there laughing and showing
his even white teeth. His black eyes, with yellow whites, darted
cautiously about the room watching the gentlemen. There was something he
did not understand. He had evidently been just brought in by Kirillov,
and his inquiring eyes turned to the latter. He stood in the doorway,
but was unwilling to come into the room.

"I suppose you got him ready here to listen to our bargaining, or
that he may actually see the money in our hands. Is that it?" asked
Stavrogin; and without waiting for an answer he walked out of the house.
Verhovensky, almost frantic, overtook him at the gate.

"Stop! Not another step!" he cried, seizing him by the arm. Stavrogin
tried to pull away his arm, but did not succeed. He was overcome with
fury. Seizing Verhovensky by the hair with his left hand he flung him
with all his might on the ground and went out at the gate. But he had
not gone thirty paces before Verhovensky overtook him again.

"Let us make it up; let us make it up!" he murmured in a spasmodic
whisper.

Stavrogin shrugged his shoulders, but neither answered nor turned round.

"Listen. I will bring you Lizaveta Nikolaevna to-morrow; shall I? No?
Why don't you answer? Tell me what you want. I'll do it. Listen. I'll
let you have Shatov. Shall I?"

"Then it's true that you meant to kill him?" cried Stavrogin.

"What do you want with Shatov? What is he to you?" Pyotr Stepanovitch
went on, gasping, speaking rapidly. He was in a frenzy, and kept running
forward and seizing Stavrogin by the elbow, probably unaware of what he
was doing. "Listen. I'll let you have him. Let's make it up. Your price
is a very great one, but... Let's make it up!"

Stavrogin glanced at him at last, and was amazed. The eyes, the voice,
were not the same as always, or as they had been in the room just now.
What he saw was almost another face. The intonation of the voice was
different. Verhovensky besought, implored. He was a man from whom what
was most precious was being taken or had been taken, and who was still
stunned by the shock.

"But what's the matter with you?" cried Stavrogin. The other did not
answer, but ran after him and gazed at him with the same imploring but
yet inflexible expression.

"Let's make it up!" he whispered once more. "Listen. Like Fedka, I have
a knife in my boot, but I'll make it up with you!"

"But what do you want with me, damn you?" Stavrogin cried, with intense
anger and amazement. "Is there some mystery about it? Am I a sort of
talisman for you?"

"Listen. We are going to make a revolution," the other muttered rapidly,
and almost in delirium. "You don't believe we shall make a revolution?
We are going to make such an upheaval that everything will be uprooted
from its foundation. Karmazinov is right that there is nothing to lay
hold of. Karmazinov is very intelligent. Another ten such groups in
different parts of Russia--and I am safe."

"Groups of fools like that?" broke reluctantly from Stavrogin.

"Oh, don't be so clever, Stavrogin; don't be so clever yourself. And you
know you are by no means so intelligent that you need wish others to
be. You are afraid, you have no faith. You are frightened at our doing
things on such a scale. And why are they fools? They are not such fools.
No one has a mind of his own nowadays. There are terribly few original
minds nowadays. Virginsky is a pure-hearted man, ten times as pure as
you or I; but never mind about him. Liputin is a rogue, but I know one
point about him. Every rogue has some point in him.... Lyamshin is the
only one who hasn't, but he is in my hands. A few more groups, and I
should have money and passports everywhere; so much at least. Suppose it
were only that? And safe places, so that they can search as they like.
They might uproot one group but they'd stick at the next. We'll set
things in a ferment.... Surely you don't think that we two are not
enough?"

"Take Shigalov, and let me alone...."

"Shigalov is a man of genius! Do you know he is a genius like Fourier,
but bolder than Fourier; stronger. I'll look after him. He's discovered
'equality '!"

"He is in a fever; he is raving; something very queer has happened
to him," thought Stavrogin, looking at him once more. Both walked on
without stopping.

"He's written a good thing in that manuscript," Verhovensky went on. "He
suggests a system of spying. Every member of the society spies on the
others, and it's his duty to inform against them. Every one belongs to
all and all to every one. All are slaves and equal in their slavery. In
extreme cases he advocates slander and murder, but the great thing about
it is equality. To begin with, the level of education, science, and
talents is lowered. A high level of education and science is only
possible for great intellects, and they are not wanted. The great
intellects have always seized the power and been despots. Great
intellects cannot help being despots and they've always done more harm
than good. They will be banished or put to death. Cicero will have his
tongue cut out, Copernicus will have his eyes put out, Shakespeare will
be stoned--that's Shigalovism. Slaves are bound to be equal. There has
never been either freedom or equality without despotism, but in the herd
there is bound to be equality, and that's Shigalovism! Ha ha ha! Do you
think it strange? I am for Shigalovism."

Stavrogin tried to quicken his pace, and to reach home as soon as
possible. "If this fellow is drunk, where did he manage to get drunk?"
crossed his mind. "Can it be the brandy?"

"Listen, Stavrogin. To level the mountains is a fine idea, not an absurd
one. I am for Shigalov. Down with culture. We've had enough science!
Without science we have material enough to go on for a thousand years,
but one must have discipline. The one thing wanting in the world is
discipline. The thirst for culture is an aristocratic thirst. The moment
you have family ties or love you get the desire for property. We will
destroy that desire; we'll make use of drunkenness, slander, spying;
we'll make use of incredible corruption; we'll stifle every genius
in its infancy. We'll reduce all to a common denominator! Complete
equality! 'We've learned a trade, and we are honest men; we need nothing
more,' that was an answer given by English working-men recently.
Only the necessary is necessary, that's the motto of the whole world
henceforward. But it needs a shock. That's for us, the directors, to
look after. Slaves must have directors. Absolute submission, absolute
loss of individuality, but once in thirty years Shigalov would let them
have a shock and they would all suddenly begin eating one another up, to
a certain point, simply as a precaution against boredom. Boredom is an
aristocratic sensation. The Shigalovians will have no desires. Desire
and suffering are our lot, but Shigalovism is for the slaves."

"You exclude yourself?" Stavrogin broke in again.

"You, too. Do you know, I have thought of giving up the world to the
Pope. Let him come forth, on foot, and barefoot, and show himself to the
rabble, saying, 'See what they have brought me to!' and they will all
rush after him, even the troops. The Pope at the head, with us
round him, and below us--Shigalovism. All that's needed is that the
Internationale should come to an agreement with the Pope; so it will.
And the old chap will agree at once. There's nothing else he can do.
Remember my words! Ha ha! Is it stupid? Tell me, is it stupid or not?"

"That's enough!" Stavrogin muttered with vexation.

"Enough! Listen. I've given up the Pope! Damn Shigalovism! Damn the
Pope! We must have something more everyday. Not Shigalovism, for
Shigalovism is a rare specimen of the jeweller's art. It's an ideal;
it's in the future. Shigalov is an artist and a fool like every
philanthropist. We need coarse work, and Shigalov despises coarse work.
Listen. The Pope shall be for the west, and you shall be for us, you
shall be for us!"

"Let me alone, you drunken fellow!" muttered Stavrogin, and he quickened
his pace.

"Stavrogin, you are beautiful," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, almost
ecstatically. "Do you know that you are beautiful! What's the most
precious thing about you is that you sometimes don't know it. Oh,
I've studied you! I often watch you on the sly! There's a lot of
simpleheartedness and naïveté about you still. Do you know that? There
still is, there is! You must be suffering and suffering genuinely from
that simple-heartedness. I love beauty. I am a nihilist, but I love
beauty. Are nihilists incapable of loving beauty? It's only idols they
dislike, but I love an idol. You are my idol! You injure no one, and
every one hates you. You treat every one as an equal, and yet every one
is afraid of you--that's good. Nobody would slap you on the shoulder.
You are an awful aristocrat. An aristocrat is irresistible when he goes
in for democracy! To sacrifice life, your own or another's is nothing
to you. You are just the man that's needed. It's just such a man as you
that I need. I know no one but you. You are the leader, you are the sun
and I am your worm."

He suddenly kissed his hand. A shiver ran down Stavrogin's spine, and he
pulled away his hand in dismay. They stood still.

"Madman!" whispered Stavrogin.

"Perhaps I am raving; perhaps I am raving," Pyotr Stepanovitch assented,
speaking rapidly. "But I've thought of the first step! Shigalov would
never have thought of it. There are lots of Shigalovs, but only one man,
one man in Russia has hit on the first step and knows how to take it.
And I am that man! Why do you look at me? I need you, you; without you
I am nothing. Without you I am a fly, a bottled idea; Columbus without
America."

Stavrogin stood still and looked intently into his wild eyes.

"Listen. First of all we'll make an upheaval," Verhovensky went on in
desperate haste, continually clutching at Stavrogin's left sleeve. "I've
already told you. We shall penetrate to the peasantry. Do you know that
we are tremendously powerful already? Our party does not consist only of
those who commit murder and arson, fire off pistols in the traditional
fashion, or bite colonels. They are only a hindrance. I don't accept
anything without discipline. I am a scoundrel, of course, and not a
socialist. Ha ha! Listen. I've reckoned them all up: a teacher who
laughs with children at their God and at their cradle; is on our side.
The lawyer who defends an educated murderer because he is more cultured
than his victims and could not, help murdering them to get money is one
of us. The schoolboys who murder a peasant for the sake of sensation are
ours. The juries who acquit every criminal are ours. The prosecutor who
trembles at a trial for fear he should not seem advanced enough is ours,
ours. Among officials and literary men we have lots, lots, and they
don't know it themselves. On the other hand, the docility of schoolboys
and fools has reached an extreme pitch; the schoolmasters are bitter
and bilious. On all sides we see vanity puffed up out of all proportion;
brutal, monstrous appetites.... Do you know how many we shall catch by
little, ready-made ideas? When I left Russia, Littre's dictum that crime
is insanity was all the rage; I come back and I find that crime is
no longer insanity, but simply common sense, almost a duty; anyway,
a gallant protest. 'How can we expect a cultured man not to commit a
murder, if he is in need of money.' But these are only the first fruits.
The Russian God has already been vanquished by cheap vodka. The peasants
are drunk, the mothers are drunk, the children are drunk, the churches
are empty, and in the peasant courts one hears, 'Two hundred lashes or
stand us a bucket of vodka.' Oh, this generation has only to grow up.
It's only a pity we can't afford to wait, or we might have let them get
a bit more tipsy! Ah, what a pity there's no proletariat! But there will
be, there will be; we are going that way...."

"It's a pity, too, that we've grown greater fools," muttered Stavrogin,
moving forward as before.

"Listen. I've seen a child of six years old leading home his drunken
mother, whilst she swore at him with foul words. Do you suppose I am
glad of that? When it's in our hands, maybe we'll mend things... if need
be, we'll drive them for forty years into the wilderness.... But one
or two generations of vice are essential now; monstrous, abject vice by
which a man is transformed into a loathsome, cruel, egoistic reptile.
That's what we need! And what's more, a little 'fresh blood' that we
may get accustomed to it. Why are you laughing? I am not contradicting
myself. I am only contradicting the philanthropists and Shigalovism,
not myself! I am a scoundrel, not a socialist. Ha ha ha! I'm only sorry
there's no time. I promised Karmazinov to begin in May, and to make an
end by October. Is that too soon? Ha ha! Do you know what, Stavrogin?
Though the Russian people use foul language, there's nothing cynical
about them so far. Do you know the serfs had more self-respect than
Karmazinov? Though they were beaten they always preserved their gods,
which is more than Karmazinov's done."

"Well, Verhovensky, this is the first time I've heard you talk, and I
listen with amazement," observed Stavrogin. "So you are really not a
socialist, then, but some sort of... ambitious politician?"

"A scoundrel, a scoundrel! You are wondering what I am. I'll tell you
what I am directly, that's what I am leading up to. It was not for
nothing that I kissed your hand. But the people-must believe that we
know what we are after, while the other side do nothing but 'brandish
their cudgels and beat their own followers.' Ah, if we only had more
time! That's the only trouble, we have no time. We will proclaim
destruction..... Why is it, why is it that idea has such a fascination.
But we must have a little exercise; we must. We'll set fires going....
We'll set legends going. Every scurvy 'group' will be of use. Out of
those very groups I'll pick you out fellows so keen they'll not shrink
from shooting, and be grateful for the honour of a job, too. Well, and
there will be an upheaval! There's going to be such an upset as
the world has never seen before.... Russia will be overwhelmed with
darkness, the earth will weep for its old gods..... Well, then we shall
bring forward... whom?"

"Whom?"

"Ivan the Tsarevitch."

"Who-m?"

"Ivan the Tsarevitch. You! You!"

Stavrogin thought a minute.

"A pretender?" he asked suddenly, looking with intense-surprise at his
frantic companion. "Ah! so that's your plan at last!"

"We shall say that he is 'in hiding,'" Verhovensky said softly, in a
sort of tender whisper, as though he really were drunk indeed. "Do you
know the magic of that phrase, 'he is in hiding'? But he will appear,
he will appear. We'll set a legend going better than the Skoptsis'. He
exists, but no one has seen him. Oh, what a legend one can set going!
And the great thing is it will be a new force at work! And we need that;
that's what they are crying for. What can Socialism do: it's destroyed
the old forces but hasn't brought in any new.. But in this we have a
force, and what a force! Incredible. We only need one lever to lift up
the earth. Everything will rise up!"

"Then have you been seriously reckoning on me?" Stavrogin said with a
malicious smile.

"Why do you laugh, and so spitefully? Don't frighten me. I am like a
little child now. I can be frightened to death by one-smile like that.
Listen. I'll let no one see you, no one. So it-must be. He exists, but
no one has seen him; he is in hiding. And do you know, one might show
you, to one out of a hundred-thousand, for instance. And the rumour will
spread over all the land, 'We've seen him, we've seen him.'

"Ivan Filipovitch the God of Sabaoth*, has been seen, too, when he
ascended into heaven in his chariot in the sight of men. They saw
him with their own eyes. And you are not an Ivan Filipovitch. You are
beautiful and proud as a God; you are seeking nothing for yourself,
with the halo of a victim round you, 'in hiding.' The great thing is
the legend. You'll conquer them, you'll have only to look, and you will
conquer them. He is 'in hiding,' and will come forth bringing a new
truth. And, meanwhile, we'll pass two or three judgments as wise
as Solomon's. The groups, you know, the quintets--we've no need of
newspapers. If out of ten thousand petitions only one is granted, all
would come with petitions. In every parish, every peasant will know that
there is somewhere a hollow tree where petitions are to be put. And the
whole land will resound with the cry, 'A new just law is to come,' and
the sea will be troubled and the whole gimcrack show will fall to the
ground, and then we shall consider how to build up an edifice of stone.
For the first time! We are going to build it, we, and only we!"

     * The reference is to the legend current in the sect of
     Flagellants.--Translator's note.

"Madness," said Stavrogin.

"Why, why don't you want it? Are you afraid? That's why I caught at you,
because you are afraid of nothing. Is it unreasonable? But you see, so
far I am Columbus without America. Would Columbus without America seem
reasonable?"

Stavrogin did not speak. Meanwhile they had reached the house and
stopped at the entrance.

"Listen," Verhovensky bent down to his ear. "I'll do it for you without
the money. I'll settle Marya Timofyevna to-morrow!... Without the money,
and to-morrow I'll bring you Liza. Will you have Liza to-morrow?"

"Is he really mad?" Stavrogin wondered smiling. The front door was
opened.

"Stavrogin--is America ours?" said Verhovensky, seizing his hand for the
last time.

"What for?" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, gravely and sternly.

"You don't care, I knew that!" cried Verhovensky in an access of furious
anger. "You are lying, you miserable, profligate, perverted, little
aristocrat! I don't believe you, you've the appetite of a wolf!...
Understand that you've cost me such a price, I can't give you up now!
There's no one on earth but you! I invented you abroad; I invented it
all, looking at you. If I hadn't watched you from my corner, nothing of
all this would have entered my head!"

Stavrogin went up the steps without answering.

"Stavrogin!" Verhovensky called after him, "I give you a day... two,
then... three, then; more than three I can't--and then you're to
answer!"




CHAPTER IX. A RAID AT STEFAN TROFIMOVITCH'S

Meanwhile an incident had occurred which astounded me and shattered
Stepan Trofimovitch. At eight o'clock in the morning Nastasya ran round
to me from him with the news that her master was "raided." At first I
could not make out what she meant; I could only gather that the "raid"
was carried out by officials, that they had come and taken his papers,
and that a soldier had tied them up in a bundle and "wheeled them away
in a barrow." It was a fantastic story. I hurried at once to Stepan
Trofimovitch.

I found him in a surprising condition: upset and in great agitation, but
at the same time unmistakably triumphant. On the table in the middle of
the room the samovar was boiling, and there was a glass of tea poured
out but untouched and forgotten. Stepan Trofimovitch was wandering round
the table and peeping into every corner of the room, unconscious of what
he was doing. He was wearing his usual red knitted jacket, but seeing
me, he hurriedly put on his coat and waistcoat--a thing he had never
done before when any of his intimate friends found him in his jacket. He
took me warmly by the hand at once.

_"Enfin un ami!"_ (He heaved a deep sigh.) "_Cher,_ I've sent to you only,
and no one knows anything. We must give Nastasya orders to lock the
doors and not admit anyone, except, of course them.... _Vous comprenez?_"

He looked at me uneasily, as though expecting a reply. I made haste, of
course, to question him, and from his disconnected and broken sentences,
full of unnecessary parentheses, I succeeded in learning that at seven
o'clock that morning an official of the province had 'all of a sudden'
called on him.

"_Pardon, j'ai oublié son nom. Il n'est pas du pays,_ but I think he came
to the town with Lembke, _quelque chose de bête et d'Allemand dans la
physionomie. Il s'appelle Rosenthal._"

"Wasn't it Blum?"

"Yes, that was his name. _Vous le connaissez? Quelque chose d'hébété et
de très content dans la figure, pourtant très sevère, roide et sérieux._
A type of the police, of the submissive subordinates, _je m'y connais._ I
was still asleep, and, would you believe it, he asked to have a look at
my books and manuscripts! _Oui, je m'en souviens, il a employé ce mot._ He
did not arrest me, but only the books. _Il se tenait à distance,_ and when
he began to explain his visit he looked as though I... _enfin il
avait l'air de croire que je tomberai sur lui immédiatement et que je
commencerai a le battre comme plâtre. Tous ces gens du bas étage sont
comme ça_ when they have to do with a gentleman. I need hardly say I
understood it all at once. _Voilà vingt ans que je m'y prépare._ I opened
all the drawers and handed him all the keys; I gave them myself, I gave
him all. _J'étais digne et calme._ From the books he took the foreign
edition of Herzen, the bound volume of _The Bell,_ four copies of my poem,
_et enfin tout ça._ Then he took my letters and my papers _et quelques-unes
de mes ébauches historiques, critiques et politiques._ All that they
carried off. Nastasya says that a soldier wheeled them away in a barrow
and covered them with an apron; _oui, c'est cela,_ with an apron." It
sounded like delirium. Who could make head or tail of it? I pelted him
with questions again. Had Blum come alone, or with others? On whose
authority? By what right? How had he dared? How did he explain it?

"_Il etait seul, bien seul,_ but there was some one else _dans
l'antichambre, oui, je m'en souviens, et puis..._ Though I believe there
was some one else besides, and there was a guard standing in the entry.
You must ask Nastasya; she knows all about it better than I do. _J'étais
surexcité, voyez-vous. Il parlait, il parlait... un tas de chases_; he
said very little though, it was I said all that.... I told him the
story of my life, simply from that point of view, of course. _J'étais
surexcité, mais digne, je vous assure...._ I am afraid, though, I may
have shed tears. They got the barrow from the shop next door."

"Oh, heavens! how could all this have happened? But for mercy's sake,
speak more exactly, Stepan Trofimovitch. What you tell me sounds like a
dream."

"_Cher,_ I feel as though I were in a dream myself.... _Savez-vous! Il
a prononcé le nom de Telyatnikof,_ and I believe that that man was
concealed in the entry. Yes, I remember, he suggested calling the
prosecutor and Dmitri Dmitritch, I believe... _qui me doit encore quinze
roubles_ I won at cards, _soit dit en passant. Enfin, je n'ai pas trop
compris._ But I got the better of them, and what do I care for Dmitri
Dmitritch? I believe I begged him very earnestly to keep it quiet;
I begged him particularly, most particularly. I am afraid I demeaned
myself, in fact, _comment croyez-vous? Enfin il a consenti._ Yes, I
remember, he suggested that himself--that it would be better to keep it
quiet, for he had only come 'to have a look round' _et rien de plus,_ and
nothing more, nothing more... and that if they find nothing, nothing
will happen. So that we ended it all _en amis, je suis tout a fait
content._"

"Why, then he suggested the usual course of proceedings in such cases
and regular guarantees, and you rejected them yourself," I cried with
friendly indignation.

"Yes, it's better without the guarantees. And why make a scandal? Let's
keep it _en amis_ so long as we can. You know, in our town, if they get to
know it... _mes ennemis, et puis, a quoi bon, le procureur, ce cochon de
notre procureur, qui deux fois m'a manqué de politesse et qu'on a rossé
à plaisir l'autre année chez cette charmante et belle Natalya Pavlovna
quand il se cacha dans son boudoir. Et puis, mon ami,_ don't make
objections and don't depress me, I beg you, for nothing is more
unbearable when a man is in trouble than for a hundred friends to point
out to him what a fool he has made of himself. Sit down though and have
some tea. I must admit I am awfully tired.... Hadn't I better lie down
and put vinegar on my head? What do you think?"

"Certainly," I cried, "ice even. You are very much upset. You are pale
and your hands are trembling. Lie down, rest, and put off telling me.
I'll sit by you and wait."

He hesitated, but I insisted on his lying down. Nastasya brought a cup
of vinegar. I wetted a towel and laid it on his head. Then Nastasya
stood on a chair and began lighting a lamp before the ikon in the
corner. I noticed this with surprise; there had never been a lamp there
before and now suddenly it had made its appearance.

"I arranged for that as soon as they had gone away," muttered Stepan
Trofimovitch, looking at me slyly. "_Quand on a de ces choses-là dans sa
chambre et qu'on vient vous arrêter_ it makes an impression and they are
sure to report that they have seen it...."

When she had done the lamp, Nastasya stood in the doorway, leaned her
cheek in her right hand, and began gazing at him with a lachrymose air.

"_Eloignez-la_ on some excuse," he nodded to me from the sofa. "I can't
endure this Russian sympathy, _et puis ça m'embête._"

But she went away of herself. I noticed that he kept looking towards the
door and listening for sounds in the passage.

_"Il faut être prêt, voyez-vous,"_ he said, looking at me significantly,
_"chaque moment..._ they may come and take one and, phew!--a man
disappears."

"Heavens! who'll come? Who will take you?"

"_Voyez-vous, mon cher,_ I asked straight out when he was going away, what
would they do to me now."

"You'd better have asked them where you'd be exiled!" I cried out in the
same indignation.

"That's just what I meant when I asked, but he went away without
answering. _Voyez-vous:_ as for linen, clothes, warm things especially,
that must be as they decide; if they tell me to take them--all right,
or they might send me in a soldier's overcoat. But I thrust thirty-five
roubles" (he suddenly dropped his voice, looking towards the door by
which Nastasya had gone out) "in a slit in my waistcoat pocket, here,
feel.... I believe they won't take the waistcoat off, and left seven
roubles in my purse to keep up appearances, as though that were all I
have. You see, it's in small change and the coppers are on the table,
so they won't guess that I've hidden the money, but will suppose that
that's all. For God knows where I may have to sleep to-night!"

I bowed my head before such madness. It was obvious that a man could not
be arrested and searched in the way he was describing, and he must
have mixed things up. It's true it all happened in the days before our
present, more recent regulations. It is true, too, that according to his
own account they had offered to follow the more regular procedure, but
he "got the better of them" and refused.... Of course not long ago a
governor might, in extreme cases.... But how could this be an extreme
case? That's what baffled me.

"No doubt they had a telegram from Petersburg," Stepan Trofimovitch said
suddenly.

"A telegram? About you? Because of the works of Herzen and your poem?
Have you taken leave of your senses? What is there in that to arrest you
for?"

I was positively angry. He made a grimace and was evidently
mortified--not at my exclamation, but at the idea that there was no
ground for arrest.

"Who can tell in our day what he may not be arrested for?" he muttered
enigmatically.

A wild and nonsensical idea crossed my mind.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, tell me as a friend," I cried, "as a real friend,
I will not betray you: do you belong to some secret society or not?"

And on this, to my amazement, he was not quite certain whether he was or
was not a member of some secret society.

"That depends, _voyez-vous._"

"How do you mean 'it depends'?"

"When with one's whole heart one is an adherent of progress and... who
can answer it? You may suppose you don't belong, and suddenly it turns
out that you do belong to something."

"Now is that possible? It's a case of yes or no."

"_Cela date de Petersburg_ when she and I were meaning to found a magazine
there. That's what's at the root of it. She gave them the slip then, and
they forgot us, but now they've remembered. _Cher, cher,_ don't you know
me?" he cried hysterically. "And they'll take us, put us in a cart, and
march us off to Siberia for ever, or forget us in prison."

And he suddenly broke into bitter weeping. His tears positively
streamed. He covered his face with his red silk handkerchief and sobbed,
sobbed convulsively for five minutes. It wrung my heart. This was
the man who had been a prophet among us for twenty years, a leader,
a patriarch, the Kukolnik who had borne himself so loftily and
majestically before all of us, before whom we bowed down with genuine
reverence, feeling proud of doing so--and all of a sudden here he was
sobbing, sobbing like a naughty child waiting for the rod which the
teacher is fetching for him. I felt fearfully sorry for him. He believed
in the reality of that "cart" as he believed that I was sitting by his
side, and he expected it that morning, at once, that very minute, and
all this on account of his Herzen and some poem! Such complete, absolute
ignorance of everyday reality was touching and somehow repulsive.

At last he left off crying, got up from the sofa and began walking about
the room again, continuing to talk to me, though he looked out of the
window every minute and listened to every sound in the passage. Our
conversation was still disconnected. All my assurances and attempts
to console him rebounded from him like peas from a wall. He scarcely
listened, but yet what he needed was that I should console him and keep
on talking with that object. I saw that he could not do without me now,
and would not let me go for anything. I remained, and we spent more than
two hours together. In conversation he recalled that Blum had taken with
him two manifestoes he had found.

"Manifestoes!" I said, foolishly frightened. "Do you mean to say
you..."

"Oh, ten were left here," he answered with vexation (he talked to me
at one moment in a vexed and haughty tone and at the next with dreadful
plaintiveness and humiliation), "but I had disposed of eight already,
and Blum only found two." And he suddenly flushed with indignation.
"_Vous me mettez avec ces gens-là!_ Do you suppose I could be working
with those scoundrels, those anonymous libellers, with my son Pyotr
Stepanovitch, _avec ces esprits forts de lâcheté?_ Oh, heavens!"

"Bah! haven't they mixed you up perhaps?... But it's nonsense, it can't
be so," I observed.

_"Savez-vous,"_ broke from him suddenly, "I feel at moments _que je ferai
là-bas quelque esclandre._ Oh, don't go away, don't leave me alone! _Ma
carrière est finie aujourd'hui, je le sens._ Do you know, I might fall on
somebody there and bite him, like that lieutenant."

He looked at me with a strange expression--alarmed, and at the same time
anxious to alarm me. He certainly was getting more and more exasperated
with somebody and about something as time went on and the police-cart
did not appear; he was positively wrathful. Suddenly Nastasya, who
had come from the kitchen into the passage for some reason, upset a
clothes-horse there. Stepan Trofimovitch trembled and turned numb with
terror as he sat; but when the noise was explained, he almost shrieked
at Nastasya and, stamping, drove her back to the kitchen. A minute later
he said, looking at me in despair: "I am ruined! _Cher_"--he sat down
suddenly beside me and looked piteously into my face--"_cher,_ it's not
Siberia I am afraid of, I swear. _Oh, je vous jure!_" (Tears positively
stood in his eyes.) "It's something else I fear."

I saw from his expression that he wanted at last to tell me something of
great importance which he had till now refrained from telling.

"I am afraid of disgrace," he whispered mysteriously.

"What disgrace? On the contrary! Believe me, Stepan Trofimovitch, that all
this will be explained to-day and will end to your advantage...."

"Are you so sure that they will pardon me?"

"Pardon you? What! What a word! What have you done? I assure you you've
done nothing."

"_Qu'en savez-vous;_ all my life has been... _cher_... They'll remember
everything... and if they find nothing, it will be _worse still_," he
added all of a sudden, unexpectedly.

"How do you mean it will be worse?"

"It will be worse."

"I don't understand."

"My friend, let it be Siberia, Archangel, loss of rights--if I must
perish, let me perish! But... I am afraid of something else." (Again
whispering, a scared face, mystery.)

"But of what? Of what?"

"They'll flog me," he pronounced, looking at me with a face of despair.

"Who'll flog you? What for? Where?" I cried, feeling alarmed that he was
going out of his mind.

"Where? Why there... where 'that's' done."

"But where is it done?"

"Eh, _cher,_" he whispered almost in my ear. "The floor suddenly gives
way under you, you drop half through.... Every one knows that."

"Legends!" I cried, guessing what he meant. "Old tales. Can you have
believed them till now?" I laughed.

"Tales! But there must be foundation for them; flogged men tell no
tales. I've imagined it ten thousand times."

"But you, why you? You've done nothing, you know."

"That makes it worse. They'll find out I've done nothing and flog me for
it."

"And you are sure that you'll be taken to Petersburg for that."

"My friend, I've told you already that I regret nothing, _ma carrière est
finie._ From that hour when she said good-bye to me at Skvoreshniki my
life has had no value for me... but disgrace, disgrace, _que dira-t-elle_
if she finds out?"

He looked at me in despair. And the poor fellow flushed all over. I
dropped my eyes too.

"She'll find out nothing, for nothing will happen to you. I feel as if I
were speaking to you for the first time in my life, Stepan Trofimovitch,
you've astonished me so this morning."

"But, my friend, this isn't fear. For even if I am pardoned, even if
I am brought here and nothing is done to me--then I am undone. _Elle me
soupçonnera toute sa vie_--me, me, the poet, the thinker, the man whom
she has worshipped for twenty-two years!"

"It will never enter her head."

"It will," he whispered with profound conviction. "We've talked of it
several times in Petersburg, in Lent, before we came away, when we
were both afraid.... _Elle me soupçonnera toute sa vie..._ and how can
I disabuse her? It won't sound likely. And in this wretched town who'd
believe it, _c'est invraisemblable.... Et puis les femmes,_ she will be
pleased. She will be genuinely grieved like a true friend, but secretly
she will be pleased.... I shall give her a weapon against me for the
rest of my life. Oh, it's all over with me! Twenty years of such perfect
happiness with her... and now!" He hid his face in his hands.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, oughtn't you to let Varvara Petrovna know at once
of what has happened?" I suggested.

"God preserve me!" he cried, shuddering and leaping up from his
place. "On no account, never, after what was said at parting at
Skvoreshniki--never!"

His eyes flashed.

We went on sitting together another hour or more, I believe, expecting
something all the time--the idea had taken such hold of us. He lay down
again, even closed his eyes, and lay for twenty minutes without uttering
a word, so that I thought he was asleep or unconscious. Suddenly he got
up impulsively, pulled the towel off his head, jumped up from the sofa,
rushed to the looking-glass, with trembling hands tied his cravat, and
in a voice of thunder called to Nastasya, telling her to give him his
overcoat, his new hat and his stick.

"I can bear no more," he said in a breaking voice. "I can't, I can't! I
am going myself."

"Where?" I cried, jumping up too.

"To Lembke. _Cher,_ I ought, I am obliged. It's my duty. I am a citizen
and a man, not a worthless chip. I have rights; I want my rights....
For twenty years I've not insisted on my rights. All my life I've
neglected them criminally... but now I'll demand them. He must tell me
everything--everything. He received a telegram. He dare not torture me;
if so, let him arrest me, let him arrest me!"

He stamped and vociferated almost with shrieks. "I approve of what you
say," I said, speaking as calmly as possible, on purpose, though I was
very much afraid for him.

"Certainly it is better than sitting here in such misery, but I can't
approve of your state of mind. Just see what you look like and in what a
state you are going there! _Il faut être digne et calme avec Lembke._ You
really might rush at some one there and bite him."

"I am giving myself up. I am walking straight into the jaws of the lion...."

"I'll go with you."

"I expected no less of you, I accept your sacrifice, the sacrifice of a
true friend; but only as far as the house, only as far as the house. You
ought not, you have no right to compromise yourself further by being my
confederate. _Oh, croyez-moi, je serai calme._ I feel that I am at this
moment _à la hauteur de tout ce que il y a de plus sacré...._"

"I may perhaps go into the house with you," I interrupted him. "I had a
message from their stupid committee yesterday through Vysotsky that they
reckon on me and invite me to the _fête_ to-morrow as one of the stewards
or whatever it is... one of the six young men whose duty it is to look
after the trays, wait on the ladies, take the guests to their places,
and wear a rosette of crimson and white ribbon on the left shoulder. I
meant to refuse, but now why shouldn't I go into the house on the
excuse of seeing Yulia Mihailovna herself about it?... So we will go
in together."

He listened, nodding, but I think he understood nothing. We stood on the
threshold.

_"Cher"_--he stretched out his arm to the lamp before the ikon--"_cher,_
I have never believed in this, but... so be it, so be it!" He crossed
himself. _"Allons!"_

"Well, that's better so," I thought as I went out on to the steps with
him. "The fresh air will do him good on the way, and we shall calm down,
turn back, and go home to bed...."

But I reckoned without my host. On the way an adventure occurred which
agitated Stepan Trofimovitch even more, and finally determined him to go
on... so that I should never have expected of our friend so much spirit
as he suddenly displayed that morning. Poor friend, kind-hearted friend!




CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING

The adventure that befell us on the way was also a surprising one. But I
must tell the story in due order. An hour before Stepan Trofimovitch
and I came out into the street, a crowd of people, the hands from
Shpigulins' factory, seventy or more in number, had been marching
through the town, and had been an object of curiosity to many
spectators. They walked intentionally in good order and almost in
silence. Afterwards it was asserted that these seventy had been elected
out of the whole number of factory hands, amounting to about nine
hundred, to go to the governor and to try and get from him, in the
absence of their employer, a just settlement of their grievances against
the manager, who, in closing the factory and dismissing the workmen, had
cheated them all in an impudent way--a fact which has since been proved
conclusively. Some people still deny that there was any election of
delegates, maintaining that seventy was too large a number to elect,
and that the crowd simply consisted of those who had been most unfairly
treated, and that they only came to ask for help in their own case, so
that the general "mutiny" of the factory workers, about which there
was such an uproar later on, had never existed at all. Others fiercely
maintained that these seventy men were not simple strikers but
revolutionists, that is, not merely that they were the most turbulent,
but that they must have been worked upon by seditious manifestoes.
The fact is, it is still uncertain whether there had been any outside
influence or incitement at work or not. My private opinion is that the
workmen had not read the seditious manifestoes at all, and if they had
read them, would not have understood one word, for one reason because
the authors of such literature write very obscurely in spite of the
boldness of their style. But as the workmen really were in a difficult
plight and the police to whom they appealed would not enter into their
grievances, what could be more natural than their idea of going in a
body to "the general himself" if possible, with the petition at their
head, forming up in an orderly way before his door, and as soon as he
showed himself, all falling on their knees and crying out to him as to
providence itself? To my mind there is no need to see in this a mutiny
or even a deputation, for it's a traditional, historical mode of
action; the Russian people have always loved to parley with "the general
himself" for the mere satisfaction of doing so, regardless of how the
conversation may end.

And so I am quite convinced that, even though Pyotr Stepanovitch,
Liputin, and perhaps some others--perhaps even Fedka too--had been
flitting about among the workpeople talking to them (and there is fairly
good evidence of this), they had only approached two, three, five at the
most, trying to sound them, and nothing had come of their conversation.
As for the mutiny they advocated, if the factory-workers did understand
anything of their propaganda, they would have left off listening to it
at once as to something stupid that had nothing to do with them. Fedka
was a different matter: he had more success, I believe, than Pyotr
Stepanovitch. Two workmen are now known for a fact to have assisted
Fedka in causing the fire in the town which occurred three days
afterwards, and a month later three men who had worked in the factory
were arrested for robbery and arson in the province. But if in these
cases Fedka did lure them to direct and immediate action, he could only
have succeeded with these five, for we heard of nothing of the sort
being done by others.

Be that as it may, the whole crowd of workpeople had at last reached the
open space in front of the governor's house and were drawn up there in
silence and good order. Then, gaping open-mouthed at the front door,
they waited. I am told that as soon as they halted they took off their
caps, that is, a good half-hour before the appearance of the governor,
who, as ill-luck would have it, was not at home at the moment. The
police made their appearance at once, at first individual policemen and
then as large a contingent of them as could be gathered together; they
began, of course, by being menacing, ordering them to break up. But
the workmen remained obstinately, like a flock of sheep at a fence, and
replied laconically that they had come to see "the general himself"; it
was evident that they were firmly determined. The unnatural shouting
of the police ceased, and was quickly succeeded by deliberations,
mysterious whispered instructions, and stern, fussy perplexity, which
wrinkled the brows of the police officers. The head of the police
preferred to await the arrival of the "governor himself." It was not
true that he galloped to the spot with three horses at full speed, and
began hitting out right and left before he alighted from his carriage.
It's true that he used to dash about and was fond of dashing about at
full speed in a carriage with a yellow back, and while his trace-horses,
who were so trained to carry their heads that they looked "positively
perverted," galloped more and more frantically, rousing the enthusiasm
of all the shopkeepers in the bazaar, he would rise up in the carriage,
stand erect, holding on by a strap which had been fixed on purpose at
the side, and with his right arm extended into space like a figure on a
monument, survey the town majestically. But in the present case he did
not use his fists, and though as he got out of the carriage he could not
refrain from a forcible expression, this was simply done to keep up
his popularity. There is a still more absurd story that soldiers were
brought up with bayonets, and that a telegram was sent for artillery and
Cossacks; those are legends which are not believed now even by those
who invented them. It's an absurd story, too, that barrels of water were
brought from the fire brigade, and that people were drenched with water
from them. The simple fact is that Ilya Ilyitch shouted in his heat that
he wouldn't let one of them come dry out of the water; probably this was
the foundation of the barrel legend which got into the columns of the
Petersburg and Moscow newspapers. Probably the most accurate version was
that at first all the available police formed a cordon round the crowd,
and a messenger was sent for Lembke, a police superintendent, who dashed
off in the carriage belonging to the head of the police on the way to
Skvoreshniki, knowing that Lembke had gone there in his carriage half an
hour before.

But I must confess that I am still unable to answer the question how
they could at first sight, from the first moment, have transformed an
insignificant, that is to say an ordinary, crowd of petitioners, even
though there were several of them, into a rebellion which threatened to
shake the foundations of the state. Why did Lembke himself rush at that
idea when he arrived twenty minutes after the messenger? I imagine (but
again it's only my private opinion) that it was to the interest of Ilya
Ilyitch, who was a crony of the factory manager's, to represent the
crowd in this light to Lembke, in order to prevent him from going into
the case; and Lembke himself had put the idea into his head. In the
course of the last two days, he had had two unusual and mysterious
conversations with him. It is true they were exceedingly obscure,
but Ilya Ilyitch was able to gather from them that the governor had
thoroughly made up his mind that there were political manifestoes, and
that Shpigulins' factory hands were being incited to a Socialist rising,
