Tell me!"

"Surely not you?" cried the prince.

"Just so," said Lebedeff, with dignity; "and only this very morning I
have sent up a letter to the noble lady, stating that I have a matter of
great importance to communicate. She received the letter; I know she got
it; and she received _me_, too."

"Have you just seen Lizabetha Prokofievna?" asked the prince, scarcely
believing his ears.

"Yes, I saw her, and got the said slap in the face as mentioned. She
chucked the letter back to me unopened, and kicked me out of the house,
morally, not physically, although not far off it."

"What letter do you mean she returned unopened?"

"What! didn't I tell you? Ha, ha, ha! I thought I had. Why, I received a
letter, you know, to be handed over--"

"From whom? To whom?"

But it was difficult, if not impossible, to extract anything from
Lebedeff. All the prince could gather was, that the letter had been
received very early, and had a request written on the outside that it
might be sent on to the address given.

"Just as before, sir, just as before! To a certain person, and from
a certain hand. The individual's name who wrote the letter is to be
represented by the letter A.--"

"What? Impossible! To Nastasia Philipovna? Nonsense!" cried the prince.

"It was, I assure you, and if not to her then to Rogojin, which is
the same thing. Mr. Hippolyte has had letters, too, and all from the
individual whose name begins with an A.," smirked Lebedeff, with a
hideous grin.

As he kept jumping from subject to subject, and forgetting what he had
begun to talk about, the prince said nothing, but waited, to give him
time.

It was all very vague. Who had taken the letters, if letters there were?
Probably Vera--and how could Lebedeff have got them? In all probability,
he had managed to steal the present letter from Vera, and had himself
gone over to Lizabetha Prokofievna with some idea in his head. So the
prince concluded at last.

"You are mad!" he cried, indignantly.

"Not quite, esteemed prince," replied Lebedeff, with some acerbity. "I
confess I thought of doing you the service of handing the letter over to
yourself, but I decided that it would pay me better to deliver it up to
the noble lady aforesaid, as I had informed her of everything hitherto
by anonymous letters; so when I sent her up a note from myself, with
the letter, you know, in order to fix a meeting for eight o'clock this
morning, I signed it 'your secret correspondent.' They let me in at
once--very quickly--by the back door, and the noble lady received me."

"Well? Go on."

"Oh, well, when I saw her she almost punched my head, as I say; in fact
so nearly that one might almost say she did punch my head. She threw
the letter in my face; she seemed to reflect first, as if she would
have liked to keep it, but thought better of it and threw it in my face
instead. 'If anybody can have been such a fool as to trust a man like
you to deliver the letter,' says she,' take it and deliver it! 'Hey! she
was grandly indignant. A fierce, fiery lady that, sir!"

"Where's the letter now?"

"Oh, I've still got it, here!"

And he handed the prince the very letter from Aglaya to Gania, which the
latter showed with so much triumph to his sister at a later hour.

"This letter cannot be allowed to remain in your hands."

"It's for you--for you! I've brought it you on purpose!" cried Lebedeff,
excitedly. "Why, I'm yours again now, heart and hand, your slave; there
was but a momentary pause in the flow of my love and esteem for you. Mea
culpa, mea culpa! as the Pope of Rome says.

"This letter should be sent on at once," said the prince, disturbed.
"I'll hand it over myself."

"Wouldn't it be better, esteemed prince, wouldn't it be
better--to--don't you know--"

Lebedeff made a strange and very expressive grimace; he twisted about in
his chair, and did something, apparently symbolical, with his hands.

"What do you mean?" said the prince.

"Why, open it, for the time being, don't you know?" he said, most
confidentially and mysteriously.

The prince jumped up so furiously that Lebedeff ran towards the door;
having gained which strategic position, however, he stopped and looked
back to see if he might hope for pardon.

"Oh, Lebedeff, Lebedeff! Can a man really sink to such depths of
meanness?" said the prince, sadly.

Lebedeff's face brightened.

"Oh, I'm a mean wretch--a mean wretch!" he said, approaching the prince
once more, and beating his breast, with tears in his eyes.

"It's abominable dishonesty, you know!"

"Dishonesty--it is, it is! That's the very word!"

"What in the world induces you to act so? You are nothing but a spy.
Why did you write anonymously to worry so noble and generous a lady? Why
should not Aglaya Ivanovna write a note to whomever she pleases? What
did you mean to complain of today? What did you expect to get by it?
What made you go at all?"

"Pure amiable curiosity,--I assure you--desire to do a service. That's
all. Now I'm entirely yours again, your slave; hang me if you like!"

"Did you go before Lizabetha Prokofievna in your present condition?"
inquired the prince.

"No--oh no, fresher--more the correct card. I only became this like
after the humiliation I suffered there,

"Well--that'll do; now leave me."

This injunction had to be repeated several times before the man could be
persuaded to move. Even then he turned back at the door, came as far as
the middle of the room, and there went through his mysterious motions
designed to convey the suggestion that the prince should open the
letter. He did not dare put his suggestion into words again.

After this performance, he smiled sweetly and left the room on tiptoe.

All this had been very painful to listen to. One fact stood out certain
and clear, and that was that poor Aglaya must be in a state of great
distress and indecision and mental torment ("from jealousy," the prince
whispered to himself). Undoubtedly in this inexperienced, but hot and
proud little head, there were all sorts of plans forming, wild and
impossible plans, maybe; and the idea of this so frightened the prince
that he could not make up his mind what to do. Something must be done,
that was clear.

He looked at the address on the letter once more. Oh, he was not in the
least degree alarmed about Aglaya writing such a letter; he could trust
her. What he did not like about it was that he could not trust Gania.

However, he made up his mind that he would himself take the note and
deliver it. Indeed, he went so far as to leave the house and walk up the
road, but changed his mind when he had nearly reached Ptitsin's door.
However, he there luckily met Colia, and commissioned him to deliver the
letter to his brother as if direct from Aglaya. Colia asked no questions
but simply delivered it, and Gania consequently had no suspicion that it
had passed through so many hands.

Arrived home again, the prince sent for Vera Lebedeff and told her as
much as was necessary, in order to relieve her mind, for she had been in
a dreadful state of anxiety since she had missed the letter. She heard
with horror that her father had taken it. Muishkin learned from her that
she had on several occasions performed secret missions both for Aglaya
and for Rogojin, without, however, having had the slightest idea that in
so doing she might injure the prince in any way.

The latter, with one thing and another, was now so disturbed and
confused, that when, a couple of hours or so later, a message came from
Colia that the general was ill, he could hardly take the news in.

However, when he did master the fact, it acted upon him as a tonic
by completely distracting his attention. He went at once to Nina
Alexandrovna's, whither the general had been carried, and stayed there
until the evening. He could do no good, but there are people whom
to have near one is a blessing at such times. Colia was in an almost
hysterical state; he cried continuously, but was running about all day,
all the same; fetching doctors, of whom he collected three; going to the
chemist's, and so on.

The general was brought round to some extent, but the doctors
declared that he could not be said to be out of danger. Varia and Nina
Alexandrovna never left the sick man's bedside; Gania was excited and
distressed, but would not go upstairs, and seemed afraid to look at the
patient. He wrung his hands when the prince spoke to him, and said that
"such a misfortune at such a moment" was terrible.

The prince thought he knew what Gania meant by "such a moment."

Hippolyte was not in the house. Lebedeff turned up late in the
afternoon; he had been asleep ever since his interview with the prince
in the morning. He was quite sober now, and cried with real sincerity
over the sick general--mourning for him as though he were his own
brother. He blamed himself aloud, but did not explain why. He repeated
over and over again to Nina Alexandrovna that he alone was to blame--no
one else--but that he had acted out of "pure amiable curiosity," and
that "the deceased," as he insisted upon calling the still living
general, had been the greatest of geniuses.

He laid much stress on the genius of the sufferer, as if this idea must
be one of immense solace in the present crisis.

Nina Alexandrovna--seeing his sincerity of feeling--said at last,
and without the faintest suspicion of reproach in her voice: "Come,
come--don't cry! God will forgive you!"

Lebedeff was so impressed by these words, and the tone in which
they were spoken, that he could not leave Nina Alexandrovna all the
evening--in fact, for several days. Till the general's death, indeed, he
spent almost all his time at his side.

Twice during the day a messenger came to Nina Alexandrovna from the
Epanchins to inquire after the invalid.

When--late in the evening--the prince made his appearance in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's drawing-room, he found it full of guests. Mrs. Epanchin
questioned him very fully about the general as soon as he appeared; and
when old Princess Bielokonski wished to know "who this general was, and
who was Nina Alexandrovna," she proceeded to explain in a manner which
pleased the prince very much.

He himself, when relating the circumstances of the general's illness to
Lizabetha Prokofievna, "spoke beautifully," as Aglaya's sisters declared
afterwards--"modestly, quietly, without gestures or too many words, and
with great dignity." He had entered the room with propriety and grace,
and he was perfectly dressed; he not only did not "fall down on the
slippery floor," as he had expressed it, but evidently made a very
favourable impression upon the assembled guests.

As for his own impression on entering the room and taking his seat,
he instantly remarked that the company was not in the least such
as Aglaya's words had led him to fear, and as he had dreamed of--in
nightmare form--all night.

This was the first time in his life that he had seen a little corner of
what was generally known by the terrible name of "society." He had long
thirsted, for reasons of his own, to penetrate the mysteries of the
magic circle, and, therefore, this assemblage was of the greatest
possible interest to him.

His first impression was one of fascination. Somehow or other he felt
that all these people must have been born on purpose to be together! It
seemed to him that the Epanchins were not having a party at all; that
these people must have been here always, and that he himself was one
of them--returned among them after a long absence, but one of them,
naturally and indisputably.

It never struck him that all this refined simplicity and nobility and
wit and personal dignity might possibly be no more than an exquisite
artistic polish. The majority of the guests--who were somewhat
empty-headed, after all, in spite of their aristocratic bearing--never
guessed, in their self-satisfied composure, that much of their
superiority was mere veneer, which indeed they had adopted unconsciously
and by inheritance.

The prince would never so much as suspect such a thing in the delight of
his first impression.

He saw, for instance, that one important dignitary, old enough to be his
grandfather, broke off his own conversation in order to listen to _him_--a
young and inexperienced man; and not only listened, but seemed to
attach value to his opinion, and was kind and amiable, and yet they
were strangers and had never seen each other before. Perhaps what most
appealed to the prince's impressionability was the refinement of the old
man's courtesy towards him. Perhaps the soil of his susceptible nature
was really predisposed to receive a pleasant impression.

Meanwhile all these people-though friends of the family and of each
other to a certain extent--were very far from being such intimate
friends of the family and of each other as the prince concluded. There
were some present who never would think of considering the Epanchins
their equals. There were even some who hated one another cordially. For
instance, old Princess Bielokonski had all her life despised the wife
of the "dignitary," while the latter was very far from loving Lizabetha
Prokofievna. The dignitary himself had been General Epanchin's protector
from his youth up; and the general considered him so majestic a
personage that he would have felt a hearty contempt for himself if
he had even for one moment allowed himself to pose as the great man's
equal, or to think of him--in his fear and reverence-as anything less
than an Olympic God! There were others present who had not met for
years, and who had no feeling whatever for each other, unless it were
dislike; and yet they met tonight as though they had seen each other but
yesterday in some friendly and intimate assembly of kindred spirits.

It was not a large party, however. Besides Princess Bielokonski and the
old dignitary (who was really a great man) and his wife, there was an
old military general--a count or baron with a German name, a man reputed
to possess great knowledge and administrative ability. He was one
of those Olympian administrators who know everything except Russia,
pronounce a word of extraordinary wisdom, admired by all, about once in
five years, and, after being an eternity in the service, generally die
full of honour and riches, though they have never done anything great,
and have even been hostile to all greatness. This general was Ivan
Fedorovitch's immediate superior in the service; and it pleased the
latter to look upon him also as a patron. On the other hand, the great
man did not at all consider himself Epanchin's patron. He was always
very cool to him, while taking advantage of his ready services, and
would instantly have put another in his place if there had been the
slightest reason for the change.

Another guest was an elderly, important-looking gentleman, a distant
relative of Lizabetha Prokofievna's. This gentleman was rich, held a
good position, was a great talker, and had the reputation of being "one
of the dissatisfied," though not belonging to the dangerous sections
of that class. He had the manners, to some extent, of the English
aristocracy, and some of their tastes (especially in the matter of
under-done roast beef, harness, men-servants, etc.). He was a great
friend of the dignitary's, and Lizabetha Prokofievna, for some reason or
other, had got hold of the idea that this worthy intended at no distant
date to offer the advantages of his hand and heart to Alexandra.

Besides the elevated and more solid individuals enumerated, there were
present a few younger though not less elegant guests. Besides Prince S.
and Evgenie Pavlovitch, we must name the eminent and fascinating Prince
N.--once the vanquisher of female hearts all over Europe. This gentleman
was no longer in the first bloom of youth--he was forty-five, but still
very handsome. He was well off, and lived, as a rule, abroad, and was
noted as a good teller of stories. Then came a few guests belonging to
a lower stratum of society--people who, like the Epanchins themselves,
moved only occasionally in this exalted sphere. The Epanchins liked to
draft among their more elevated guests a few picked representatives of
this lower stratum, and Lizabetha Prokofievna received much praise for
this practice, which proved, her friends said, that she was a woman of
tact. The Epanchins prided themselves upon the good opinion people held
of them.

One of the representatives of the middle-class present today was a
colonel of engineers, a very serious man and a great friend of Prince
S., who had introduced him to the Epanchins. He was extremely silent in
society, and displayed on the forefinger of his right hand a large ring,
probably bestowed upon him for services of some sort. There was also
a poet, German by name, but a Russian poet; very presentable, and even
handsome-the sort of man one could bring into society with impunity.
This gentleman belonged to a German family of decidedly bourgeois
origin, but he had a knack of acquiring the patronage of "big-wigs," and
of retaining their favour. He had translated some great German poem into
Russian verse, and claimed to have been a friend of a famous Russian
poet, since dead. (It is strange how great a multitude of literary
people there are who have had the advantages of friendship with some
great man of their own profession who is, unfortunately, dead.) The
dignitary's wife had introduced this worthy to the Epanchins. This
lady posed as the patroness of literary people, and she certainly
had succeeded in obtaining pensions for a few of them, thanks to her
influence with those in authority on such matters. She was a lady of
weight in her own way. Her age was about forty-five, so that she was a
very young wife for such an elderly husband as the dignitary. She had
been a beauty in her day and still loved, as many ladies of forty-five
do love, to dress a little too smartly. Her intellect was nothing to
boast of, and her literary knowledge very doubtful. Literary patronage
was, however, with her as much a mania as was the love of gorgeous
clothes. Many books and translations were dedicated to her by her
proteges, and a few of these talented individuals had published some of
their own letters to her, upon very weighty subjects.

This, then, was the society that the prince accepted at once as true
coin, as pure gold without alloy.

It so happened, however, that on this particular evening all these good
people were in excellent humour and highly pleased with themselves.
Every one of them felt that they were doing the Epanchins the greatest
possible honour by their presence. But alas! the prince never suspected
any such subtleties! For instance, he had no suspicion of the fact that
the Epanchins, having in their mind so important a step as the marriage
of their daughter, would never think of presuming to take it without
having previously "shown off" the proposed husband to the dignitary--the
recognized patron of the family. The latter, too, though he would
probably have received news of a great disaster to the Epanchin family
with perfect composure, would nevertheless have considered it a personal
offence if they had dared to marry their daughter without his advice, or
we might almost say, his leave.

The amiable and undoubtedly witty Prince N. could not but feel that
he was as a sun, risen for one night only to shine upon the Epanchin
drawing-room. He accounted them immeasurably his inferiors, and it was
this feeling which caused his special amiability and delightful ease and
grace towards them. He knew very well that he must tell some story this
evening for the edification of the company, and led up to it with the
inspiration of anticipatory triumph.

The prince, when he heard the story afterwards, felt that he had never
yet come across so wonderful a humorist, or such remarkable brilliancy
as was shown by this man; and yet if he had only known it, this story
was the oldest, stalest, and most worn-out yarn, and every drawing-room
in town was sick to death of it. It was only in the innocent Epanchin
household that it passed for a new and brilliant tale--as a sudden and
striking reminiscence of a splendid and talented man.

Even the German poet, though as amiable as possible, felt that he was
doing the house the greatest of honours by his presence in it.

But the prince only looked at the bright side; he did not turn the coat
and see the shabby lining.

Aglaya had not foreseen that particular calamity. She herself looked
wonderfully beautiful this evening. All three sisters were dressed very
tastefully, and their hair was done with special care.

Aglaya sat next to Evgenie Pavlovitch, and laughed and talked to him
with an unusual display of friendliness. Evgenie himself behaved rather
more sedately than usual, probably out of respect to the dignitary.
Evgenie had been known in society for a long while. He had appeared at
the Epanchins' today with crape on his hat, and Princess Bielokonski had
commended this action on his part. Not every society man would have worn
crape for "such an uncle." Lizabetha Prokofievna had liked it also, but
was too preoccupied to take much notice. The prince remarked that Aglaya
looked attentively at him two or three times, and seemed to be satisfied
with his behaviour.

Little by little he became very happy indeed. All his late anxieties and
apprehensions (after his conversation with Lebedeff) now appeared like
so many bad dreams--impossible, and even laughable.

He did not speak much, only answering such questions as were put to him,
and gradually settled down into unbroken silence, listening to what went
on, and steeped in perfect satisfaction and contentment.

Little by little a sort of inspiration, however, began to stir within
him, ready to spring into life at the right moment. When he did begin
to speak, it was accidentally, in response to a question, and apparently
without any special object.

VII.

While he feasted his eyes upon Aglaya, as she talked merrily with
Evgenie and Prince N., suddenly the old anglomaniac, who was talking to
the dignitary in another corner of the room, apparently telling him a
story about something or other--suddenly this gentleman pronounced
the name of "Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff" aloud. The prince quickly
turned towards him, and listened.

The conversation had been on the subject of land, and the present
disorders, and there must have been something amusing said, for the old
man had begun to laugh at his companion's heated expressions.

The latter was describing in eloquent words how, in consequence of
recent legislation, he was obliged to sell a beautiful estate in the N.
province, not because he wanted ready money--in fact, he was obliged
to sell it at half its value. "To avoid another lawsuit about the
Pavlicheff estate, I ran away," he said. "With a few more inheritances
of that kind I should soon be ruined!"

At this point General Epanchin, noticing how interested Muishkin had
become in the conversation, said to him, in a low tone:

"That gentleman--Ivan Petrovitch--is a relation of your late friend, Mr.
Pavlicheff. You wanted to find some of his relations, did you not?"

The general, who had been talking to his chief up to this moment, had
observed the prince's solitude and silence, and was anxious to draw him
into the conversation, and so introduce him again to the notice of some
of the important personages.

"Lef Nicolaievitch was a ward of Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, after
the death of his own parents," he remarked, meeting Ivan Petrovitch's
eye.

"Very happy to meet him, I'm sure," remarked the latter. "I remember
Lef Nicolaievitch well. When General Epanchin introduced us just now,
I recognized you at once, prince. You are very little changed, though
I saw you last as a child of some ten or eleven years old. There was
something in your features, I suppose, that--"

"You saw me as a child!" exclaimed the prince, with surprise.

"Oh! yes, long ago," continued Ivan Petrovitch, "while you were living
with my cousin at Zlatoverhoff. You don't remember me? No, I dare
say you don't; you had some malady at the time, I remember. It was so
serious that I was surprised--"

"No; I remember nothing!" said the prince. A few more words of
explanation followed, words which were spoken without the smallest
excitement by his companion, but which evoked the greatest agitation in
the prince; and it was discovered that two old ladies to whose care the
prince had been left by Pavlicheff, and who lived at Zlatoverhoff, were
also relations of Ivan Petrovitch.

The latter had no idea and could give no information as to why
Pavlicheff had taken so great an interest in the little prince, his
ward.

"In point of fact I don't think I thought much about it," said the old
fellow. He seemed to have a wonderfully good memory, however, for he
told the prince all about the two old ladies, Pavlicheff's cousins, who
had taken care of him, and whom, he declared, he had taken to task
for being too severe with the prince as a small sickly boy--the elder
sister, at least; the younger had been kind, he recollected. They
both now lived in another province, on a small estate left to them by
Pavlicheff. The prince listened to all this with eyes sparkling with
emotion and delight.

He declared with unusual warmth that he would never forgive himself for
having travelled about in the central provinces during these last six
months without having hunted up his two old friends.

He declared, further, that he had intended to go every day, but had
always been prevented by circumstances; but that now he would promise
himself the pleasure--however far it was, he would find them out. And so
Ivan Petrovitch _really_ knew Natalia Nikitishna!--what a saintly nature
was hers!--and Martha Nikitishna! Ivan Petrovitch must excuse him,
but really he was not quite fair on dear old Martha. She was severe,
perhaps; but then what else could she be with such a little idiot as he
was then? (Ha, ha.) He really was an idiot then, Ivan Petrovitch must
know, though he might not believe it. (Ha, ha.) So he had really seen
him there! Good heavens! And was he really and truly and actually a
cousin of Pavlicheff's?

"I assure you of it," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, gazing amusedly at the
prince.

"Oh! I didn't say it because I _doubt_ the fact, you know. (Ha, ha.)
How could I doubt such a thing? (Ha, ha, ha.) I made the remark
because--because Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff was such a splendid man,
don't you see! Such a high-souled man, he really was, I assure you."

The prince did not exactly pant for breath, but he "seemed almost
to _choke_ out of pure simplicity and goodness of heart," as Adelaida
expressed it, on talking the party over with her fiance, the Prince S.,
next morning.

"But, my goodness me," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, "why can't I be cousin
to even a splendid man?"

"Oh, dear!" cried the prince, confused, trying to hurry his words
out, and growing more and more eager every moment: "I've gone and said
another stupid thing. I don't know what to say. I--I didn't mean that,
you know--I--I--he really was such a splendid man, wasn't he?"

The prince trembled all over. Why was he so agitated? Why had he flown
into such transports of delight without any apparent reason? He had far
outshot the measure of joy and emotion consistent with the occasion. Why
this was it would be difficult to say.

He seemed to feel warmly and deeply grateful to someone for something or
other--perhaps to Ivan Petrovitch; but likely enough to all the guests,
individually, and collectively. He was much too happy.

Ivan Petrovitch began to stare at him with some surprise; the dignitary,
too, looked at him with considerable attention; Princess Bielokonski
glared at him angrily, and compressed her lips. Prince N., Evgenie,
Prince S., and the girls, all broke off their own conversations and
listened. Aglaya seemed a little startled; as for Lizabetha Prokofievna,
her heart sank within her.

This was odd of Lizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters. They had
themselves decided that it would be better if the prince did not talk
all the evening. Yet seeing him sitting silent and alone, but perfectly
happy, they had been on the point of exerting themselves to draw him
into one of the groups of talkers around the room. Now that he was in
the midst of a talk they became more than ever anxious and perturbed.

"That he was a splendid man is perfectly true; you are quite right,"
repeated Ivan Petrovitch, but seriously this time. "He was a fine and a
worthy fellow--worthy, one may say, of the highest respect," he added,
more and more seriously at each pause; "and it is agreeable to see, on
your part, such--"

"Wasn't it this same Pavlicheff about whom there was a strange story in
connection with some abbot? I don't remember who the abbot was, but I
remember at one time everybody was talking about it," remarked the old
dignitary.

"Yes--Abbot Gurot, a Jesuit," said Ivan Petrovitch. "Yes, that's the
sort of thing our best men are apt to do. A man of rank, too, and
rich--a man who, if he had continued to serve, might have done anything;
and then to throw up the service and everything else in order to go over
to Roman Catholicism and turn Jesuit--openly, too--almost triumphantly.
By Jove! it was positively a mercy that he died when he did--it was
indeed--everyone said so at the time."

The prince was beside himself.

"Pavlicheff?--Pavlicheff turned Roman Catholic? Impossible!" he cried,
in horror.

"H'm! impossible is rather a strong word," said Ivan Petrovitch. "You
must allow, my dear prince... However, of course you value the memory of
the deceased so very highly; and he certainly was the kindest of men;
to which fact, by the way, I ascribe, more than to anything else, the
success of the abbot in influencing his religious convictions. But you
may ask me, if you please, how much trouble and worry I, personally,
had over that business, and especially with this same Gurot! Would you
believe it," he continued, addressing the dignitary, "they actually
tried to put in a claim under the deceased's will, and I had to resort
to the very strongest measures in order to bring them to their senses?
I assure you they knew their cue, did these gentlemen--wonderful! Thank
goodness all this was in Moscow, and I got the Court, you know, to help
me, and we soon brought them to their senses.

"You wouldn't believe how you have pained and astonished me," cried the
prince.

"Very sorry; but in point of fact, you know, it was all nonsense and
would have ended in smoke, as usual--I'm sure of that. Last year,"--he
turned to the old man again,--"Countess K. joined some Roman Convent
abroad. Our people never seem to be able to offer any resistance so soon
as they get into the hands of these--intriguers--especially abroad."

"That is all thanks to our lassitude, I think," replied the old man,
with authority. "And then their way of preaching; they have a skilful
manner of doing it! And they know how to startle one, too. I got quite
a fright myself in '32, in Vienna, I assure you; but I didn't cave in to
them, I ran away instead, ha, ha!"

"Come, come, I've always heard that you ran away with the beautiful
Countess Levitsky that time--throwing up everything in order to do
it--and not from the Jesuits at all," said Princess Bielokonski,
suddenly.

"Well, yes--but we call it from the Jesuits, you know; it comes to
the same thing," laughed the old fellow, delighted with the pleasant
recollection.

"You seem to be very religious," he continued, kindly, addressing the
prince, "which is a thing one meets so seldom nowadays among young
people."

The prince was listening open-mouthed, and still in a condition of
excited agitation. The old man was evidently interested in him, and
anxious to study him more closely.

"Pavlicheff was a man of bright intellect and a good Christian, a
sincere Christian," said the prince, suddenly. "How could he possibly
embrace a faith which is unchristian? Roman Catholicism is, so to speak,
simply the same thing as unchristianity," he added with flashing eyes,
which seemed to take in everybody in the room.

"Come, that's a little _too_ strong, isn't it?" murmured the old man,
glancing at General Epanchin in surprise.

"How do you make out that the Roman Catholic religion is _unchristian?_
What is it, then?" asked Ivan Petrovitch, turning to the prince.

"It is not a Christian religion, in the first place," said the latter,
in extreme agitation, quite out of proportion to the necessity of the
moment. "And in the second place, Roman Catholicism is, in my opinion,
worse than Atheism itself. Yes--that is my opinion. Atheism only
preaches a negation, but Romanism goes further; it preaches a
disfigured, distorted Christ--it preaches Anti-Christ--I assure you, I
swear it! This is my own personal conviction, and it has long distressed
me. The Roman Catholic believes that the Church on earth cannot stand
without universal temporal Power. He cries 'non possumus!' In my
opinion the Roman Catholic religion is not a faith at all, but simply a
continuation of the Roman Empire, and everything is subordinated to
this idea--beginning with faith. The Pope has seized territories and an
earthly throne, and has held them with the sword. And so the thing has
gone on, only that to the sword they have added lying, intrigue, deceit,
fanaticism, superstition, swindling;--they have played fast and loose
with the most sacred and sincere feelings of men;--they have exchanged
everything--everything for money, for base earthly _power!_ And is this
not the teaching of Anti-Christ? How could the upshot of all this
be other than Atheism? Atheism is the child of Roman Catholicism--it
proceeded from these Romans themselves, though perhaps they would not
believe it. It grew and fattened on hatred of its parents; it is the
progeny of their lies and spiritual feebleness. Atheism! In our country
it is only among the upper classes that you find unbelievers; men who
have lost the root or spirit of their faith; but abroad whole masses of
the people are beginning to profess unbelief--at first because of
the darkness and lies by which they were surrounded; but now out of
fanaticism, out of loathing for the Church and Christianity!"

The prince paused to get breath. He had spoken with extraordinary
rapidity, and was very pale.

All present interchanged glances, but at last the old dignitary burst
out laughing frankly. Prince N. took out his eye-glass to have a good
look at the speaker. The German poet came out of his corner and crept
nearer to the table, with a spiteful smile.

"You exaggerate the matter very much," said Ivan Petrovitch, with rather
a bored air. "There are, in the foreign Churches, many representatives
of their faith who are worthy of respect and esteem."

"Oh, but I did not speak of individual representatives. I was merely
talking about Roman Catholicism, and its essence--of Rome itself. A
Church can never entirely disappear; I never hinted at that!"

"Agreed that all this may be true; but we need not discuss a subject
which belongs to the domain of theology."

"Oh, no; oh, no! Not to theology alone, I assure you! Why, Socialism is
the progeny of Romanism and of the Romanistic spirit. It and its brother
Atheism proceed from Despair in opposition to Catholicism. It seeks to
replace in itself the moral power of religion, in order to appease the
spiritual thirst of parched humanity and save it; not by Christ, but
by force. 'Don't dare to believe in God, don't dare to possess any
individuality, any property! _Fraternité ou la Mort_; two million heads.
'By their works ye shall know them'--we are told. And we must not
suppose that all this is harmless and without danger to ourselves. Oh,
no; we must resist, and quickly, quickly! We must let our Christ shine
forth upon the Western nations, our Christ whom we have preserved
intact, and whom they have never known. Not as slaves, allowing
ourselves to be caught by the hooks of the Jesuits, but carrying our
Russian civilization to _them_, we must stand before them, not letting it
be said among us that their preaching is 'skilful,' as someone expressed
it just now."

"But excuse me, excuse me;" cried Ivan Petrovitch considerably
disturbed, and looking around uneasily. "Your ideas are, of course, most
praiseworthy, and in the highest degree patriotic; but you exaggerate
the matter terribly. It would be better if we dropped the subject."

"No, sir, I do not exaggerate, I understate the matter, if anything,
undoubtedly understate it; simply because I cannot express myself as I
should like, but--"

"Allow me!"

The prince was silent. He sat straight up in his chair and gazed
fervently at Ivan Petrovitch.

"It seems to me that you have been too painfully impressed by the news
of what happened to your good benefactor," said the old dignitary,
kindly, and with the utmost calmness of demeanour. "You are excitable,
perhaps as the result of your solitary life. If you would make up your
mind to live more among your fellows in society, I trust, I am sure,
that the world would be glad to welcome you, as a remarkable young man;
and you would soon find yourself able to look at things more calmly. You
would see that all these things are much simpler than you think; and,
besides, these rare cases come about, in my opinion, from ennui and from
satiety."

"Exactly, exactly! That is a true thought!" cried the prince. "From
ennui, from our ennui but not from satiety! Oh, no, you are wrong there!
Say from _thirst_ if you like; the thirst of fever! And please do not
suppose that this is so small a matter that we may have a laugh at it
and dismiss it; we must be able to foresee our disasters and arm against
them. We Russians no sooner arrive at the brink of the water, and
realize that we are really at the brink, than we are so delighted with
the outlook that in we plunge and swim to the farthest point we can
see. Why is this? You say you are surprised at Pavlicheff's action; you
ascribe it to madness, to kindness of heart, and what not, but it is not
so.

"Our Russian intensity not only astonishes ourselves; all Europe wonders
at our conduct in such cases! For, if one of us goes over to Roman
Catholicism, he is sure to become a Jesuit at once, and a rabid one into
the bargain. If one of us becomes an Atheist, he must needs begin to
insist on the prohibition of faith in God by force, that is, by the
sword. Why is this? Why does he then exceed all bounds at once? Because
he has found land at last, the fatherland that he sought in vain before;
and, because his soul is rejoiced to find it, he throws himself upon it
and kisses it! Oh, it is not from vanity alone, it is not from feelings
of vanity that Russians become Atheists and Jesuits! But from spiritual
thirst, from anguish of longing for higher things, for dry firm land,
for foothold on a fatherland which they never believed in because they
never knew it. It is easier for a Russian to become an Atheist, than for
any other nationality in the world. And not only does a Russian 'become
an Atheist,' but he actually _believes in_ Atheism, just as though he
had found a new faith, not perceiving that he has pinned his faith to
a negation. Such is our anguish of thirst! 'Whoso has no country has no
God.' That is not my own expression; it is the expression of a merchant,
one of the Old Believers, whom I once met while travelling. He did not
say exactly these words. I think his expression was:

"'Whoso forsakes his country forsakes his God.'

"But let these thirsty Russian souls find, like Columbus' discoverers, a
new world; let them find the Russian world, let them search and discover
all the gold and treasure that lies hid in the bosom of their own land!
Show them the restitution of lost humanity, in the future, by Russian
thought alone, and by means of the God and of the Christ of our Russian
faith, and you will see how mighty and just and wise and good a giant
will rise up before the eyes of the astonished and frightened world;
astonished because they expect nothing but the sword from us, because
they think they will get nothing out of us but barbarism. This has
been the case up to now, and the longer matters go on as they are now
proceeding, the more clear will be the truth of what I say; and I--"

But at this moment something happened which put a most unexpected end to
the orator's speech. All this heated tirade, this outflow of passionate
words and ecstatic ideas which seemed to hustle and tumble over each
other as they fell from his lips, bore evidence of some unusually
disturbed mental condition in the young fellow who had "boiled over" in
such a remarkable manner, without any apparent reason.

Of those who were present, such as knew the prince listened to his
outburst in a state of alarm, some with a feeling of mortification. It
was so unlike his usual timid self-constraint; so inconsistent with his
usual taste and tact, and with his instinctive feeling for the higher
proprieties. They could not understand the origin of the outburst; it
could not be simply the news of Pavlicheff's perversion. By the ladies
the prince was regarded as little better than a lunatic, and Princess
Bielokonski admitted afterwards that "in another minute she would have
bolted."

The two old gentlemen looked quite alarmed. The old general (Epanchin's
chief) sat and glared at the prince in severe displeasure. The colonel
sat immovable. Even the German poet grew a little pale, though he wore
his usual artificial smile as he looked around to see what the others
would do.

In point of fact it is quite possible that the matter would have ended
in a very commonplace and natural way in a few minutes. The undoubtedly
astonished, but now more collected, General Epanchin had several times
endeavoured to interrupt the prince, and not having succeeded he was now
preparing to take firmer and more vigorous measures to attain his end.
In another minute or two he would probably have made up his mind to lead
the prince quietly out of the room, on the plea of his being ill (and it
was more than likely that the general was right in his belief that the
prince _was_ actually ill), but it so happened that destiny had something
different in store.

At the beginning of the evening, when the prince first came into the
room, he had sat down as far as possible from the Chinese vase which
Aglaya had spoken of the day before.

Will it be believed that, after Aglaya's alarming words, an ineradicable
conviction had taken possession of his mind that, however he might try
to avoid this vase next day, he must certainly break it? But so it was.

During the evening other impressions began to awaken in his mind, as
we have seen, and he forgot his presentiment. But when Pavlicheff was
mentioned and the general introduced him to Ivan Petrovitch, he had
changed his place, and went over nearer to the table; when, it so
happened, he took the chair nearest to the beautiful vase, which stood
on a pedestal behind him, just about on a level with his elbow.

As he spoke his last words he had risen suddenly from his seat with a
wave of his arm, and there was a general cry of horror.

The huge vase swayed backwards and forwards; it seemed to be uncertain
whether or no to topple over on to the head of one of the old men,
but eventually determined to go the other way, and came crashing over
towards the German poet, who darted out of the way in terror.

The crash, the cry, the sight of the fragments of valuable china
covering the carpet, the alarm of the company--what all this meant
to the poor prince it would be difficult to convey to the mind of the
reader, or for him to imagine.

But one very curious fact was that all the shame and vexation and
mortification which he felt over the accident were less powerful than
the deep impression of the almost supernatural truth of his premonition.
He stood still in alarm--in almost superstitious alarm, for a moment;
then all mists seemed to clear away from his eyes; he was conscious of
nothing but light and joy and ecstasy; his breath came and went; but
the moment passed. Thank God it was not that! He drew a long breath and
looked around.

For some minutes he did not seem to comprehend the excitement around
him; that is, he comprehended it and saw everything, but he stood aside,
as it were, like someone invisible in a fairy tale, as though he had
nothing to do with what was going on, though it pleased him to take an
interest in it.

He saw them gather up the broken bits of china; he heard the loud
talking of the guests and observed how pale Aglaya looked, and how very
strangely she was gazing at him. There was no hatred in her expression,
and no anger whatever. It was full of alarm for him, and sympathy and
affection, while she looked around at the others with flashing, angry
eyes. His heart filled with a sweet pain as he gazed at her.

At length he observed, to his amazement, that all had taken their seats
again, and were laughing and talking as though nothing had happened.
Another minute and the laughter grew louder--they were laughing at him,
at his dumb stupor--laughing kindly and merrily. Several of them
spoke to him, and spoke so kindly and cordially, especially Lizabetha
Prokofievna--she was saying the kindest possible things to him.

Suddenly he became aware that General Epanchin was tapping him on the
shoulder; Ivan Petrovitch was laughing too, but still more kind and
sympathizing was the old dignitary. He took the prince by the hand and
pressed it warmly; then he patted it, and quietly urged him to recollect
himself--speaking to him exactly as he would have spoken to a little
frightened child, which pleased the prince wonderfully; and next seated
him beside himself.

The prince gazed into his face with pleasure, but still seemed to have
no power to speak. His breath failed him. The old man's face pleased him
greatly.

"Do you really forgive me?" he said at last. "And--and Lizabetha
Prokofievna too?" The laugh increased, tears came into the prince's
eyes, he could not believe in all this kindness--he was enchanted.

"The vase certainly was a very beautiful one. I remember it here for
fifteen years--yes, quite that!" remarked Ivan Petrovitch.

"Oh, what a dreadful calamity! A wretched vase smashed, and a man half
dead with remorse about it," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, loudly. "What
made you so dreadfully startled, Lef Nicolaievitch?" she added, a little
timidly. "Come, my dear boy! cheer up. You really alarm me, taking the
accident so to heart."

"Do you forgive me all--_all_, besides the vase, I mean?" said the prince,
rising from his seat once more, but the old gentleman caught his hand
and drew him down again--he seemed unwilling to let him go.

"_C'est très-curieux et c'est très-sérieux_," he whispered across the
table to Ivan Petrovitch, rather loudly. Probably the prince heard him.

"So that I have not offended any of you? You will not believe how happy
I am to be able to think so. It is as it should be. As if I _could_ offend
anyone here! I should offend you again by even suggesting such a thing."

"Calm yourself, my dear fellow. You are exaggerating again; you really
have no occasion to be so grateful to us. It is a feeling which does you
great credit, but an exaggeration, for all that."

"I am not exactly thanking you, I am only feeling a growing admiration
for you--it makes me happy to look at you. I dare say I am speaking very
foolishly, but I must speak--I must explain, if it be out of nothing
better than self-respect."

All he said and did was abrupt, confused, feverish--very likely the
words he spoke, as often as not, were not those he wished to say. He
seemed to inquire whether he _might_ speak. His eyes lighted on Princess
Bielokonski.

"All right, my friend, talk away, talk away!" she remarked. "Only don't
lose your breath; you were in such a hurry when you began, and look what
you've come to now! Don't be afraid of speaking--all these ladies
and gentlemen have seen far stranger people than yourself; you don't
astonish _them_. You are nothing out-of-the-way remarkable, you know.
You've done nothing but break a vase, and give us all a fright."

The prince listened, smiling.

"Wasn't it you," he said, suddenly turning to the old gentleman, "who
saved the student Porkunoff and a clerk called Shoabrin from being sent
to Siberia, two or three months since?"

The old dignitary blushed a little, and murmured that the prince had
better not excite himself further.

"And I have heard of _you_," continued the prince, addressing Ivan
Petrovitch, "that when some of your villagers were burned out you gave
them wood to build up their houses again, though they were no longer
your serfs and had behaved badly towards you."

"Oh, come, come! You are exaggerating," said Ivan Petrovitch, beaming
with satisfaction, all the same. He was right, however, in this
instance, for the report had reached the prince's ears in an incorrect
form.

"And you, princess," he went on, addressing Princess Bielokonski, "was
it not you who received me in Moscow, six months since, as kindly as
though I had been your own son, in response to a letter from Lizabetha
Prokofievna; and gave me one piece of advice, again as to your own son,
which I shall never forget? Do you remember?"

"What are you making such a fuss about?" said the old lady, with
annoyance. "You are a good fellow, but very silly. One gives you a
halfpenny, and you are as grateful as though one had saved your life.
You think this is praiseworthy on your part, but it is not--it is not,
indeed."

She seemed to be very angry, but suddenly burst out laughing, quite
good-humouredly.

Lizabetha Prokofievna's face brightened up, too; so did that of General
Epanchin.

"I told you Lef Nicolaievitch was a man--a man--if only he would not
be in such a hurry, as the princess remarked," said the latter, with
delight.

Aglaya alone seemed sad and depressed; her face was flushed, perhaps
with indignation.

"He really is very charming," whispered the old dignitary to Ivan
Petrovitch.

"I came into this room with anguish in my heart," continued the prince,
with ever-growing agitation, speaking quicker and quicker, and with
increasing strangeness. "I--I was afraid of you all, and afraid of
myself. I was most afraid of myself. When I returned to Petersburg, I
promised myself to make a point of seeing our greatest men, and members
of our oldest families--the old families like my own. I am now among
princes like myself, am I not? I wished to know you, and it was
necessary, very, very necessary. I had always heard so much that was
evil said of you all--more evil than good; as to how small and petty
were your interests, how absurd your habits, how shallow your education,
and so on. There is so much written and said about you! I came here
today with anxious curiosity; I wished to see for myself and form my
own convictions as to whether it were true that the whole of this upper
stratum of Russian society is _worthless_, has outlived its time, has
existed too long, and is only fit to die--and yet is dying with petty,
spiteful warring against that which is destined to supersede it and take
its place--hindering the Coming Men, and knowing not that itself is in
a dying condition. I did not fully believe in this view even before, for
there never was such a class among us--excepting perhaps at court, by
accident--or by uniform; but now there is not even that, is there? It
has vanished, has it not?"

"No, not a bit of it," said Ivan Petrovitch, with a sarcastic laugh.

"Good Lord, he's off again!" said Princess Bielokonski, impatiently.

"Laissez-le dire! He is trembling all over," said the old man, in a
warning whisper.

The prince certainly was beside himself.

"Well? What have I seen?" he continued. "I have seen men of graceful
simplicity of intellect; I have seen an old man who is not above
speaking kindly and even _listening_ to a boy like myself; I see before
me persons who can understand, who can forgive--kind, good Russian
hearts--hearts almost as kind and cordial as I met abroad. Imagine how
