can't have forgotten it! I will remind you of something else: you said
then that 'a man who was not orthodox could not be Russian.'"

"I imagine that's a Slavophil idea."

"The Slavophils of to-day disown it. Nowadays, people have grown
cleverer. But you went further: you believed that Roman Catholicism was
not Christianity; you asserted that Rome proclaimed Christ subject to
the third temptation of the devil. Announcing to all the world that
Christ without an earthly kingdom cannot hold his ground upon earth,
Catholicism by so doing proclaimed Antichrist and ruined the whole
Western world. You pointed out that if France is in agonies now it's
simply the fault of Catholicism, for she has rejected the iniquitous God
of Rome and has not found a new one. That's what you could say then! I
remember our conversations."

"If I believed, no doubt I should repeat it even now. I wasn't lying
when I spoke as though I had faith," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch pronounced
very earnestly. "But I must tell you, this repetition of my ideas in the
past makes a very disagreeable impression on me. Can't you leave off?"

"If you believe it?" repeated Shatov, paying not the slightest attention
to this request. "But didn't you tell me that if it were mathematically
proved to you that the truth excludes Christ, you'd prefer to stick to
Christ rather than to the truth? Did you say that? Did you?"

"But allow me too at last to ask a question," said Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, raising his voice. "What is the object of this
irritable and... malicious cross-examination?"

"This examination will be over for all eternity, and you will never hear
it mentioned again."

"You keep insisting that we are outside the limits of time and space."

"Hold your tongue!" Shatov cried suddenly. "I am stupid and awkward, but
let my name perish in ignominy! Let me repeat your leading idea.... Oh,
only a dozen lines, only the conclusion."

"Repeat it, if it's only the conclusion...." Stavrogin made a movement
to look at his watch, but restrained himself and did not look.

Shatov bent forward in his chair again and again held up his finger for
a moment.

"Not a single nation," he went on, as though reading it line by line,
still gazing menacingly at Stavrogin, "not a single nation has ever
been founded on principles of science or reason. There has never been
an example of it, except for a brief moment, through folly. Socialism
is from its very nature bound to be atheism, seeing that it has from the
very first proclaimed that it is an atheistic organisation of society,
and that it intends to establish itself exclusively on the elements of
science and reason. Science and reason have, from the beginning of time,
played a secondary and subordinate part in the life of nations; so it
will be till the end of time. Nations are built up and moved by another
force which sways and dominates them, the origin of which is unknown and
inexplicable: that force is the force of an insatiable desire to go on
to the end, though at the same time it denies that end. It is the force
of the persistent assertion of one's own existence, and a denial of
death. It's the spirit of life, as the Scriptures call it, 'the river of
living water,' the drying up of which is threatened in the Apocalypse.
It's the æsthetic principle, as the philosophers call it, the ethical
principle with which they identify it, 'the seeking for God,' as I call
it more simply. The object of every national movement, in every people
and at every period of its existence is only the seeking for its god,
who must be its own god, and the faith in Him as the only true one.
God is the synthetic personality of the whole people, taken from its
beginning to its end. It has never happened that all, or even many,
peoples have had one common god, but each has always had its own. It's
a sign of the decay of nations when they begin to have gods in common.
When gods begin to be common to several nations the gods are dying and
the faith in them, together with the nations themselves. The stronger
a people the more individual their God. There never has been a nation
without a religion, that is, without an idea of good and evil. Every
people has its own conception of good and evil, and its own good and
evil. When the same conceptions of good and evil become prevalent
in several nations, then these nations are dying, and then the very
distinction between good and evil is beginning to disappear. Reason
has never had the power to define good and evil, or even to distinguish
between good and evil, even approximately; on the contrary, it has
always mixed them up in a disgraceful and pitiful way; science has even
given the solution by the fist. This is particularly characteristic
of the half-truths of science, the most terrible scourge of humanity,
unknown till this century, and worse than plague, famine, or war. A
half-truth is a despot... such as has never been in the world before.
A despot that has its priests and its slaves, a despot to whom all do
homage with love and superstition hitherto inconceivable, before which
science itself trembles and cringes in a shameful way. These are your
own words, Stavrogin, all except that about the half-truth; that's my
own because I am myself a case of half-knowledge, and that's why I hate
it particularly. I haven't altered anything of your ideas or even of
your words, not a syllable."

"I don't agree that you've not altered anything," Stavrogin observed
cautiously. "You accepted them with ardour, and in your ardour have
transformed them unconsciously. The very fact that you reduce God to a
simple attribute of nationality..."

He suddenly began watching Shatov with intense and peculiar attention,
not so much his words as himself.

"I reduce God to the attribute of nationality?" cried Shatov. "On the
contrary, I raise the people to God. And has it ever been otherwise? The
people is the body of God. Every people is only a people so long as it
has its own god and excludes all other gods on earth irreconcilably; so
long as it believes that by its god it will conquer and drive out of
the world all other gods. Such, from the beginning of time, has been
the belief of all great nations, all, anyway, who have been specially
remarkable, all who have been leaders of humanity. There is no going
against facts. The Jews lived only to await the coming of the true
God and left the world the true God. The Greeks deified nature and
bequeathed the world their religion, that is, philosophy and art. Rome
deified the people in the State, and bequeathed the idea of the State to
the nations. France throughout her long history was only the incarnation
and development of the Roman god, and if they have at last flung their
Roman god into the abyss and plunged into atheism, which, for the time
being, they call socialism, it is solely because socialism is, anyway,
healthier than Roman Catholicism. If a great people does not believe
that the truth is only to be found in itself alone (in itself alone
and in it exclusively); if it does not believe that it alone is fit and
destined to raise up and save all the rest by its truth, it would at
once sink into being ethnographical material, and not a great people. A
really great people can never accept a secondary part in the history
of Humanity, nor even one of the first, but will have the first part. A
nation which loses this belief ceases to be a nation. But there is only
one truth, and therefore only a single one out of the nations can have
the true God, even though other nations may have great gods of their
own. Only one nation is 'god-bearing,' that's the Russian people,
and... and... and can you think me such a fool, Stavrogin," he yelled
frantically all at once, "that I can't distinguish whether my words at
this moment are the rotten old commonplaces that have been ground out in
all the Slavophil mills in Moscow, or a perfectly new saying, the last
word, the sole word of renewal and resurrection, and... and what do I
care for your laughter at this minute! What do I care that you utterly,
utterly fail to understand me, not a word, not a sound! Oh, how I
despise your haughty laughter and your look at this minute!"

He jumped up from his seat; there was positively foam on his lips.

"On the contrary Shatov, on the contrary," Stavrogin began with
extraordinary earnestness and self-control, still keeping his seat, "on
the contrary, your fervent words have revived many extremely powerful
recollections in me. In your words I recognise my own mood two years
ago, and now I will not tell you, as I did just now, that you have
exaggerated my ideas. I believe, indeed, that they were even more
exceptional, even more independent, and I assure you for the third time
that I should be very glad to confirm all that you've said just now,
every syllable of it, but..."

"But you want a hare?"

"Wh-a-t?"

"Your own nasty expression," Shatov laughed spitefully, sitting down
again. "To cook your hare you must first catch it, to believe in God
you must first have a god. You used to say that in Petersburg, I'm told,
like Nozdryov, who tried to catch a hare by his hind legs."

"No, what he did was to boast he'd caught him. By the way, allow me to
trouble you with a question though, for indeed I think I have the right
to one now. Tell me, have you caught your hare?"

"Don't dare to ask me in such words! Ask differently, quite
differently." Shatov suddenly began trembling all over.

"Certainly I'll ask differently." Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked coldly
at him. "I only wanted to know, do you believe in God, yourself?"

"I believe in Russia.... I believe in her orthodoxy.... I believe in
the body of Christ.... I believe that the new advent will take place in
Russia.... I believe..." Shatov muttered frantically.

"And in God? In God?"

"I... I will believe in God."

Not one muscle moved in Stavrogin's face. Shatov looked passionately and
defiantly at him, as though he would have scorched him with his eyes.

"I haven't told you that I don't believe," he cried at last. "I will
only have you know that I am a luckless, tedious book, and nothing more
so far, so far.... But confound me! We're discussing you not me.... I'm
a man of no talent, and can only give my blood, nothing more, like every
man without talent; never mind my blood either! I'm talking about you.
I've been waiting here two years for you.... Here I've been dancing
about in my nakedness before you for the last half-hour. You, only you
can raise that flag!..."

He broke off, and sat as though in despair, with his elbows on the table
and his head in his hands.

"I merely mention it as something queer," Stavrogin interrupted
suddenly. "Every one for some inexplicable reason keeps foisting a flag
upon me. Pyotr Verhovensky, too, is convinced that I might 'raise his
flag,' that's how his words were repeated to me, anyway. He has taken it
into his head that I'm capable of playing the part of Stenka Razin for
them, 'from my extraordinary aptitude for crime,' his saying too."

"What?" cried Shatov, "'from your extraordinary aptitude for crime'?"

"Just so."

"H'm! And is it true?" he asked, with an angry smile. "Is it true
that when you were in Petersburg you belonged to a secret society for
practising beastly sensuality? Is it true that you could give lessons to
the Marquis de Sade? Is it true that you decoyed and corrupted children?
Speak, don't dare to lie," he cried, beside himself. "Nikolay Stavrogin
cannot lie to Shatov, who struck him in the face. Tell me everything,
and if it's true I'll kill you, here, on the spot!"

"I did talk like that, but it was not I who outraged children,"
Stavrogin brought out, after a silence that lasted too long. He turned
pale and his eyes gleamed.

"But you talked like that," Shatov went on imperiously, keeping his
flashing eyes fastened upon him. "Is it true that you declared that you
saw no distinction in beauty between some brutal obscene action and any
great exploit, even the sacrifice of life for the good of humanity? Is
it true that you have found identical beauty, equal enjoyment, in both
extremes?"

"It's impossible to answer like this.... I won't answer," muttered
Stavrogin, who might well have got up and gone away, but who did not get
up and go away.

"I don't know either why evil is hateful and good is beautiful, but I
know why the sense of that distinction is effaced and lost in people
like the Stavrogins," Shatov persisted, trembling all over. "Do you know
why you made that base and shameful marriage? Simply because the shame
and senselessness of it reached the pitch of genius! Oh, you are not
one of those who linger on the brink. You fly head foremost. You married
from a passion for martyrdom, from a craving for remorse, through moral
sensuality. It was a laceration of the nerves... Defiance of common
sense was too tempting. Stavrogin and a wretched, half-witted, crippled
beggar! When you bit the governor's ear did you feel sensual pleasure?
Did you? You idle, loafing, little snob. Did you?"

"You're a psychologist," said Stavrogin, turning paler and paler,
"though you're partly mistaken as to the reasons of my marriage. But
who can have given you all this information?" he asked, smiling, with an
effort. "Was it Kirillov? But he had nothing to do with it."

"You turn pale."

"But what is it you want?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked, raising
his voice at last. "I've been sitting under your lash for the last
half-hour, and you might at least let me go civilly. Unless you really
have some reasonable object in treating me like this."

"Reasonable object?"

"Of course, you're in duty bound, anyway, to let me know your object.
I've been expecting you to do so all the time, but you've shown me
nothing so far but frenzied spite. I beg you to open the gate for me."

He got up from the chair. Shatov rushed frantically after him. "Kiss
the earth, water it with your tears, pray for forgiveness," he cried,
clutching him by the shoulder.

"I didn't kill you... that morning, though... I drew back my
hands..." Stavrogin brought out almost with anguish, keeping his eyes
on the ground.

"Speak out! Speak out! You came to warn me of danger. You have let me
speak. You mean to-morrow to announce your marriage publicly.... Do
you suppose I don't see from your face that some new menacing idea
is dominating you?... Stavrogin, why am I condemned to believe in you
through all eternity? Could I speak like this to anyone else? I have
modesty, but I am not ashamed of my nakedness because it's Stavrogin
I am speaking to. I was not afraid of caricaturing a grand idea by
handling it because Stavrogin was listening to me.... Shan't I kiss your
footprints when you've gone? I can't tear you out of my heart, Nikolay
Stavrogin!"

"I'm sorry I can't feel affection for you, Shatov," Stavrogin replied
coldly.

"I know you can't, and I know you are not lying. Listen. I can set it
all right. I can 'catch your hare' for you."

Stavrogin did not speak.

"You're an atheist because you're a snob, a snob of the snobs. You've
lost the distinction between good and evil because you've lost touch
with your own people. A new generation is coming, straight from the
heart of the people, and you will know nothing of it, neither you nor
the Verhovenskys, father or son; nor I, for I'm a snob too--I, the son
of your serf and lackey, Pashka.... Listen. Attain to God by work; it
all lies in that; or disappear like rotten mildew. Attain to Him by
work."

"God by work? What sort of work?"

"Peasants' work. Go, give up all your wealth.... Ah! you laugh, you're
afraid of some trick?"

But Stavrogin was not laughing.

"You suppose that one may attain to God by work, and by peasants' work,"
he repeated, reflecting as though he had really come across something
new and serious which was worth considering. "By the way," he passed
suddenly to a new idea, "you reminded me just now. Do you know that
I'm not rich at all, that I've nothing to give up? I'm scarcely in
a position even to provide for Marya Timofyevna's future.... Another
thing: I came to ask you if it would be possible for you to remain near
Marya Timofyevna in the future, as you are the only person who has
some influence over her poor brain. I say this so as to be prepared for
anything."

"All right, all right. You're speaking of Marya Timofyevna," said
Shatov, waving one hand, while he held a candle in the other. "All
right. Afterwards, of course.... Listen. Go to Tikhon."

"To whom?"

"To Tikhon, who used to be a bishop. He lives retired now, on account of
illness, here in the town, in the Bogorodsky monastery."

"What do you mean?"

"Nothing. People go and see him. You go. What is it to you? What is it
to you?"

"It's the first time I've heard of him, and... I've never seen anything
of that sort of people. Thank you, I'll go."

"This way."

Shatov lighted him down the stairs. "Go along." He flung open the gate
into the street.

"I shan't come to you any more, Shatov," said Stavrogin quietly as he
stepped through the gateway.

The darkness and the rain continued as before.




CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued)

HE WALKED THE LENGTH of Bogoyavlensky Street. At last the road began
to go downhill; his feet slipped in the mud and suddenly there lay
open before him a wide, misty, as it were empty expanse--the river. The
houses were replaced by hovels; the street was lost in a multitude of
irregular little alleys.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was a long while making his way between
the fences, keeping close to the river bank, but finding his way
confidently, and scarcely giving it a thought indeed. He was absorbed in
something quite different, and looked round with surprise when suddenly,
waking up from a profound reverie, he found himself almost in the middle
of one long, wet, floating bridge.

There was not a soul to be seen, so that it seemed strange to him when
suddenly, almost at his elbow, he heard a deferentially familiar, but
rather pleasant, voice, with a suave intonation, such as is affected by
our over-refined tradespeople or befrizzled young shop assistants.

"Will you kindly allow me, sir, to share your umbrella?"

There actually was a figure that crept under his umbrella, or tried to
appear to do so. The tramp was walking beside him, almost "feeling
his elbow," as the soldiers say. Slackening his pace, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch bent down to look more closely, as far as he could, in
the darkness. It was a short man, and seemed like an artisan who had
been drinking; he was shabbily and scantily dressed; a cloth cap, soaked
by the rain and with the brim half torn off, perched on his shaggy,
curly head. He looked a thin, vigorous, swarthy man with dark hair;
his eyes were large and must have been black, with a hard glitter and a
yellow tinge in them, like a gipsy's; that could be divined even in the
darkness. He was about forty, and was not drunk.

"Do you know me?" asked Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. "Mr. Stavrogin, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. You were pointed out to me at the station, when the
train stopped last Sunday, though I had heard enough of you beforehand."

"From Pyotr Stepanovitch? Are you... Fedka the convict?"

"I was christened Fyodor Fyodorovitch. My mother is living to this day
in these parts; she's an old woman, and grows more and more bent every
day. She prays to God for me, day and night, so that she doesn't waste
her old age lying on the stove."

"You escaped from prison?"

"I've had a change of luck. I gave up books and bells and church-going
because I'd a life sentence, so that I had a very long time to finish my
term."

"What are you doing here?"

"Well, I do what I can. My uncle, too, died last week in prison here. He
was there for false coin, so I threw two dozen stones at the dogs by
way of memorial. That's all I've been doing so far. Moreover Pyotr
Stepanovitch gives me hopes of a passport, and a merchant's one, too, to
go all over Russia, so I'm waiting on his kindness. 'Because,' says he,
'my papa lost you at cards at the English club, and I,' says he, 'find
that inhumanity unjust.' You might have the kindness to give me three
roubles, sir, for a glass to warm myself."

"So you've been spying on me. I don't like that. By whose orders?"

"As to orders, it's nothing of the sort; it's simply that I knew of your
benevolence, which is known to all the world. All we get, as you know,
is an armful of hay, or a prod with a fork. Last Friday I filled myself
as full of pie as Martin did of soap; since then I didn't eat one day,
and the day after I fasted, and on the third I'd nothing again. I've had
my fill of water from the river. I'm breeding fish in my belly.... So
won't your honour give me something? I've a sweetheart expecting me not
far from here, but I daren't show myself to her without money."

"What did Pyotr Stepanovitch promise you from me?"

"He didn't exactly promise anything, but only said that I might be of
use to your honour if my luck turns out good, but how exactly he didn't
explain; for Pyotr Stepanovitch wants to see if I have the patience of a
Cossack, and feels no sort of confidence in me."

"Why?"

"Pyotr Stepanovitch is an astronomer, and has learnt all God's planets,
but even he may be criticised. I stand before you, sir, as before God,
because I have heard so much about you. Pyotr Stepanovitch is one thing,
but you, sir, maybe, are something else. When he's said of a man he's a
scoundrel, he knows nothing more about him except that he's a scoundrel.
Or if he's said he's a fool, then that man has no calling with him
except that of fool. But I may be a fool Tuesday and Wednesday, and on
Thursday wiser than he. Here now he knows about me that I'm awfully
sick to get a passport, for there's no getting on in Russia without
papers--so he thinks that he's snared my soul. I tell you, sir, life's
a very easy business for Pyotr Stepanovitch, for he fancies a man to be
this and that, and goes on as though he really was. And, what's more,
he's beastly stingy. It's his notion that, apart from him, I daren't
trouble you, but I stand before you, sir, as before God. This is the
fourth night I've been waiting for your honour on this bridge, to show
that I can find my own way on the quiet, without him. I'd better bow to
a boot, thinks I, than to a peasant's shoe."

"And who told you that I was going to cross the bridge at night?"

"Well, that, I'll own, came out by chance, most through Captain
Lebyadkin's foolishness, because he can't keep anything to himself....
So that three roubles from your honour would pay me for the weary time
I've had these three days and nights. And the clothes I've had soaked, I
feel that too much to speak of it."

"I'm going to the left; you'll go to the right. Here's the end of the
bridge. Listen, Fyodor; I like people to understand what I say, once for
all. I won't give you a farthing. Don't meet me in future on the bridge
or anywhere. I've no need of you, and never shall have, and if you don't
obey, I'll tie you and take you to the police. March!"

"Eh-heh! Fling me something for my company, anyhow. I've cheered you on
your way."

"Be off!"

"But do you know the way here? There are all sorts of turnings.... I
could guide you; for this town is for all the world as though the devil
carried it in his basket and dropped it in bits here and there."

"I'll tie you up!" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, turning upon him
menacingly.

"Perhaps you'll change your mind, sir; it's easy to ill-treat the
helpless."

"Well, I see you can rely on yourself!"

"I rely upon you, sir, and not very much on myself...."

"I've no need of you at all. I've told you so already."

"But I have need, that's how it is! I shall wait for you on the way
back. There's nothing for it."

"I give you my word of honour if I meet you I'll tie you up."

"Well, I'll get a belt ready for you to tie me with. A lucky journey to
you, sir. You kept the helpless snug under your umbrella. For that
alone I'll be grateful to you to my dying day." He fell behind. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch walked on to his destination, feeling disturbed. This
man who had dropped from the sky was absolutely convinced that he was
indispensable to him, Stavrogin, and was in insolent haste to tell him
so. He was being treated unceremoniously all round. But it was possible,
too, that the tramp had not been altogether lying, and had tried
to force his services upon him on his own initiative, without Pyotr
Stepanovitch's knowledge, and that would be more curious still.


II

The house which Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had reached stood alone in a
deserted lane between fences, beyond which market gardens stretched, at
the very end of the town. It was a very solitary little wooden house,
which was only just built and not yet weather-boarded. In one of the
little windows the shutters were not yet closed, and there was a candle
standing on the window-ledge, evidently as a signal to the late guest
who was expected that night. Thirty paces away Stavrogin made out on the
doorstep the figure of a tall man, evidently the master of the house,
who had come out to stare impatiently up the road. He heard his voice,
too, impatient and, as it were, timid.

"Is that you? You?"

"Yes," responded Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but not till he had mounted
the steps and was folding up his umbrella.

"At last, sir." Captain Lebyadkin, for it was he, ran fussily to and
fro. "Let me take your umbrella, please. It's very wet; I'll open it on
the floor here, in the corner. Please walk in. Please walk in."

The door was open from the passage into a room that was lighted by two
candles.

"If it had not been for your promise that you would certainly come, I
should have given up expecting you."

"A quarter to one," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking at his watch,
as he went into the room.

"And in this rain; and such an interesting distance. I've no clock...
and there are nothing but market-gardens round me... so that you fall
behind the times. Not that I murmur exactly; for I dare not, I dare not,
but only because I've been devoured with impatience all the week... to
have things settled at last."

"How so?"

"To hear my fate, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. Please sit down."

He bowed, pointing to a seat by the table, before the sofa.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked round. The room was tiny and low-pitched.
The furniture consisted only of the most essential articles, plain
wooden chairs and a sofa, also newly made without covering or cushions.
There were two tables of limewood; one by the sofa, and the other in
the corner was covered with a table-cloth, laid with things over which
a clean table-napkin had been thrown. And, indeed, the whole room was
obviously kept extremely clean.

Captain Lebyadkin had not been drunk for eight days. His face looked
bloated and yellow. His eyes looked uneasy, inquisitive, and obviously
bewildered. It was only too evident that he did not know what tone he
could adopt, and what line it would be most advantageous for him to
take.

"Here," he indicated his surroundings, "I live like Zossima. Sobriety,
solitude, and poverty--the vow of the knights of old."

"You imagine that the knights of old took such vows?"

"Perhaps I'm mistaken. Alas! I have no culture. I've ruined all. Believe
me, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, here first I have recovered from shameful
propensities--not a glass nor a drop! I have a home, and for six days
past I have experienced a conscience at ease. Even the walls smell of
resin and remind me of nature. And what have I been; what was I?

     'At night without a bed I wander
     And my tongue put out by day...'

to use the words of a poet of genius. But you're wet through....
Wouldn't you like some tea?"

"Don't trouble."

"The samovar has been boiling since eight o'clock, but it went out at
last like everything in this world. The sun, too, they say, will go
out in its turn. But if you like I'll get up the samovar. Agafya is not
asleep."

"Tell me, Marya Timofyevna..."

"She's here, here," Lebyadkin replied at once, in a whisper. "Would you
like to have a look at her?" He pointed to the closed door to the next
room.

"She's not asleep?"

"Oh, no, no. How could she be? On the contrary, she's been expecting
you all the evening, and as soon as she heard you were coming she began
making her toilet."

He was just twisting his mouth into a jocose smile, but he instantly
checked himself.

"How is she, on the whole?" asked Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, frowning.

"On the whole? You know that yourself, sir." He shrugged his shoulders
commiseratingly. "But just now... just now she's telling her fortune
with cards...."

"Very good. Later on. First of all I must finish with you."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch settled himself in a chair. The captain did not
venture to sit down on the sofa, but at once moved up another chair for
himself, and bent forward to listen, in a tremor of expectation.

"What have you got there under the table-cloth?" asked Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, suddenly noticing it.

"That?" said Lebyadkin, turning towards it also. "That's from your
generosity, by way of house-warming, so to say; considering also
the length of the walk, and your natural fatigue," he sniggered
ingratiatingly. Then he got up on tiptoe, and respectfully and carefully
lifted the table-cloth from the table in the corner. Under it was seen a
slight meal: ham, veal, sardines, cheese, a little green decanter, and a
long bottle of Bordeaux. Everything had been laid neatly, expertly, and
almost daintily.

"Was that your effort?"

"Yes, sir. Ever since yesterday I've done my best, and all to do you
honour.... Marya Timofyevna doesn't trouble herself, as you know, on
that score. And what's more its all from your liberality, your own
providing, as you're the master of the house and not I, and I'm only, so
to say, your agent. All the same, all the same, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
all the same, in spirit, I'm independent! Don't take away from me this
last possession!" he finished up pathetically.

"H'm! You might sit down again."

"Gra-a-teful, grateful, and independent." He sat down. "Ah, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, so much has been fermenting in this heart that I have
not known how to wait for your coming. Now you will decide my fate,
and... that unhappy creature's, and then... shall I pour out all I feel
to you as I used to in old days, four years ago? You deigned to listen
to me then, you read my verses.... They might call me your Falstaff from
Shakespeare in those days, but you meant so much in my life! I have
great terrors now, and its only to you I look for counsel and light.
Pyotr Stepanovitch is treating me abominably!"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch listened with interest, and looked at him
attentively. It was evident that though Captain Lebyadkin had left off
drinking he was far from being in a harmonious state of mind.
Drunkards of many years' standing, like Lebyadkin, often show traces of
incoherence, of mental cloudiness, of something, as it were, damaged,
and crazy, though they may deceive, cheat, and swindle, almost as well
as anybody if occasion arises.

"I see that you haven't changed a bit in these four years and more,
captain," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, somewhat more amiably. "It
seems, in fact, as though the second half of a man's life is usually
made up of nothing but the habits he has accumulated during the first
half."

"Grand words! You solve the riddle of life!" said the captain, half
cunningly, half in genuine and unfeigned admiration, for he was a
great lover of words. "Of all your sayings, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, I
remember one thing above all; you were in Petersburg when you said it:
'One must really be a great man to be able to make a stand even against
common sense.' That was it."

"Yes, and a fool as well."

"A fool as well, maybe. But you've been scattering clever sayings all
your life, while they.... Imagine Liputin, imagine Pyotr Stepanovitch
saying anything like that! Oh, how cruelly Pyotr Stepanovitch has
treated me!"

"But how about yourself, captain? What can you say of your behaviour?"

"Drunkenness, and the multitude of my enemies. But now that's all over,
all over, and I have a new skin, like a snake. Do you know, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, I am making my will; in fact, I've made it already?"

"That's interesting. What are you leaving, and to whom?"

"To my fatherland, to humanity, and to the students. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, I read in the paper the biography of an American. He
left all his vast fortune to factories and to the exact sciences, and
his skeleton to the students of the academy there, and his skin to be
made into a drum, so that the American national hymn might be beaten
upon it day and night. Alas! we are pigmies in mind compared with the
soaring thought of the States of North America. Russia is the play of
nature but not of mind. If I were to try leaving my skin for a drum, for
instance, to the Akmolinsky infantry regiment, in which I had the honour
of beginning my service, on condition of beating the Russian national
hymn upon it every day, in face of the regiment, they'd take it for
liberalism and prohibit my skin... and so I confine myself to the
students. I want to leave my skeleton to the academy, but on the
condition though, on the condition that a label should be stuck on the
forehead for ever and ever, with the words: 'A repentant free-thinker.'
There now!"

The captain spoke excitedly, and genuinely believed, of course, that
there was something fine in the American will, but he was cunning too,
and very anxious to entertain Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with whom he had
played the part of a buffoon for a long time in the past. But the latter
did not even smile, on the contrary, he asked, as it were, suspiciously:

"So you intend to publish your will in your lifetime and get rewarded
for it?"

"And what if I do, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch? What if I do?" said
Lebyadkin, watching him carefully. "What sort of luck have I had? I've
given up writing poetry, and at one time even you were amused by my
verses, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. Do you remember our reading them over a
bottle? But it's all over with my pen. I've written only one poem, like
Gogol's 'The Last Story.' Do you remember he proclaimed to Russia that
it broke spontaneously from his bosom? It's the same with me; I've sung
my last and it's over."

"What sort of poem?"

"'In case she were to break her leg.'"

"Wha-a-t?"

That was all the captain was waiting for. He had an unbounded admiration
for his own poems, but, through a certain cunning duplicity, he was
pleased, too, that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch always made merry over his
poems, and sometimes laughed at them immoderately. In this way he killed
two birds with one stone, satisfying at once his poetical aspirations
and his desire to be of service; but now he had a third special and very
ticklish object in view. Bringing his verses on the scene, the captain
thought to exculpate himself on one point about which, for some reason,
he always felt himself most apprehensive, and most guilty.

"'In case of her breaking her leg.' That is, of her riding on
horseback. It's a fantasy, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, a wild fancy,
but the fancy of a poet. One day I was struck by meeting a lady on
horseback, and asked myself the vital question, 'What would happen
then?' That is, in case of accident. All her followers turn away, all
her suitors are gone. A pretty kettle of fish. Only the poet
remains faithful, with his heart shattered in his breast, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. Even a louse may be in love, and is not forbidden by
law. And yet the lady was offended by the letter and the verses. I'm
told that even you were angry. Were you? I wouldn't believe in anything
so grievous. Whom could I harm simply by imagination? Besides, I swear
on my honour, Liputin kept saying, 'Send it, send it,' every man,
however humble, has a right to send a letter! And so I sent it."

"You offered yourself as a suitor, I understand."

"Enemies, enemies, enemies!"

"Repeat the verses," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sternly.

"Ravings, ravings, more than anything."

However, he drew himself up, stretched out his hand, and began:

     "With broken limbs my beauteous queen
     Is twice as charming as before,
     And, deep in love as I have been,
     To-day I love her even more."

"Come, that's enough," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, a wave of his hand.

"I dream of Petersburg," cried Lebyadkin, passing quickly to another
subject, as though there had been no mention of verses. "I dream of
regeneration.... Benefactor! May I reckon that you won't refuse the means
for the journey? I've been waiting for you all the week as my sunshine."

"I'll do nothing of the sort. I've scarcely any money left. And why
should I give you money?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch seemed suddenly angry. Dryly and briefly he
recapitulated all the captain's misdeeds; his drunkenness, his lying,
his squandering of the money meant for Marya Timofyevna, his having
taken her from the nunnery, his insolent letters threatening to publish
the secret, the way he had behaved about Darya Pavlovna, and so on, and
so on. The captain heaved, gesticulated, began to reply, but every time
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch stopped him peremptorily.

"And listen," he observed at last, "you keep writing about 'family
disgrace.' What disgrace is it to you that your sister is the lawful
wife of a Stavrogin?"

"But marriage in secret, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch--a fatal secret. I
receive money from you, and I'm suddenly asked the question, 'What's
that money for?' My hands are tied; I cannot answer to the detriment of
my sister, to the detriment of the family honour."

The captain raised his voice. He liked that subject and reckoned boldly
upon it. Alas! he did not realise what a blow was in store for him.

Calmly and exactly, as though he were speaking of the most everyday
arrangement, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch informed him that in a few days,
perhaps even to-morrow or the day after, he intended to make his
marriage known everywhere, "to the police as well as to local society."
And so the question of family honour would be settled once for all, and
with it the question of subsidy. The captain's eyes were ready to
drop out of his head; he positively could not take it in. It had to be
explained to him.

"But she is... crazy."

"I shall make suitable arrangements."

"But... how about your mother?"

"Well, she must do as she likes."

"But will you take your wife to your house?"

"Perhaps so. But that is absolutely nothing to do with you and no
concern of yours."

"No concern of mine!" cried the captain. "What about me then?"

"Well, certainly you won't come into my house."

"But, you know, I'm a relation."

"One does one's best to escape from such relations. Why should I go on
giving you money then? Judge for yourself."

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, this is impossible.
You will think better of it, perhaps? You don't want to lay hands
upon.... What will people think? What will the world say?"

"Much I care for your world. I married your sister when the fancy took
me, after a drunken dinner, for a bet, and now I'll make it public...
since that amuses me now."

He said this with a peculiar irritability, so that Lebyadkin began with
horror to believe him.

"But me, me? What about me? I'm what matters most!... Perhaps you're
joking, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch?"

"No, I'm not joking."

"As you will, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but I don't believe you.... Then
I'll take proceedings."

"You're fearfully stupid, captain."

"Maybe, but this is all that's left me," said the captain, losing his
head completely. "In old days we used to get free quarters, anyway, for
the work she did in the 'corners.' But what will happen now if you throw
me over altogether?"

"But you want to go to Petersburg to try a new career. By the way, is it
true what I hear, that you mean to go and give information, in the hope
of obtaining a pardon, by betraying all the others?"

The captain stood gaping with wide-open eyes, and made no answer.

"Listen, captain," Stavrogin began suddenly, with great earnestness,
bending down to the table. Until then he had been talking, as it were,
ambiguously, so that Lebyadkin, who had wide experience in playing the
part of buffoon, was up to the last moment a trifle uncertain whether
his patron were really angry or simply putting it on; whether he really
had the wild intention of making his marriage public, or whether he
were only playing. Now Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's stern expression was so
convincing that a shiver ran down the captain's back.

"Listen, and tell the truth, Lebyadkin. Have you betrayed anything yet,
or not? Have you succeeded in doing anything really? Have you sent a
letter to somebody in your foolishness?"

"No, I haven't... and I haven't thought of doing it," said the captain,
looking fixedly at him.

"That's a lie, that you haven't thought of doing it. That's what you're
asking to go to Petersburg for. If you haven't written, have you blabbed
to anybody here? Speak the truth. I've heard something."

"When I was drunk, to Liputin. Liputin's a traitor. I opened my heart to
him," whispered the poor captain.

"That's all very well, but there's no need to be an ass. If you had an
idea you should have kept it to yourself. Sensible people hold their
tongues nowadays; they don't go chattering."

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!" said the captain, quaking. "You've had
nothing to do with it yourself; it's not you I've..."

"Yes. You wouldn't have ventured to kill the goose that laid your golden
eggs."

"Judge for yourself, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, judge for yourself," and,
in despair, with tears, the captain began hurriedly relating the story
of his life for the last four years. It was the most stupid story of
a fool, drawn into matters that did not concern him, and in his
drunkenness and debauchery unable, till the last minute, to grasp their
importance. He said that before he left Petersburg 'he had been drawn
in, at first simply through friendship, like a regular student, although
he wasn't a student,' and knowing nothing about it, 'without being
guilty of anything,' he had scattered various papers on staircases, left
them by dozens at doors, on bell-handles, had thrust them in as though
they were newspapers, taken them to the theatre, put them in people's
hats, and slipped them into pockets. Afterwards he had taken money from
them, 'for what means had I?' He had distributed all sorts of rubbish
through the districts of two provinces. "Oh, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!"
he exclaimed, "what revolted me most was that this was utterly opposed
to civic, and still more to patriotic laws. They suddenly printed that
men were to go out with pitchforks, and to remember that those who went
out poor in the morning might go home rich at night. Only think of it!
It made me shudder, and yet I distributed it. Or suddenly five or six
lines addressed to the whole of Russia, apropos of nothing, 'Make haste
and lock up the churches, abolish God, do away with marriage, destroy
the right of inheritance, take up your knives,' that's all, and God
knows what it means. I tell you, I almost got caught with this five-line
leaflet. The officers in the regiment gave me a thrashing, but, bless
them for it, let me go. And last year I was almost caught when I passed
off French counterfeit notes for fifty roubles on Korovayev, but, thank
God, Korovayev fell into the pond when he was drunk, and was drowned
in the nick of time, and they didn't succeed in tracking me. Here, at
Virginsky's, I proclaimed the freedom of the communistic life. In June
I was distributing manifestoes again in X district. They say they
will make me do it again.... Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly gave me to
understand that I must obey; he's been threatening me a long time. How
he treated me that Sunday! Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, I am a slave, I am
a worm, but not a God, which is where I differ from Derzhavin.* But I've
no income, no income!"

     * The reference is to a poem of Derzhavin's.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch heard it all with curiosity.

"A great deal of that I had heard nothing of," he said. "Of course,
anything may have happened to you..., Listen," he said, after a minute's
thought. "If you like, you can tell them, you know whom, that Liputin
was lying, and that you were only pretending to give information to
frighten me, supposing that I, too, was compromised, and that you might
get more money out of me that way.... Do you understand?"

"Dear Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, is it possible that there's such a danger
hanging over me? I've been longing for you to come, to ask you."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch laughed.

"They certainly wouldn't let you go to Petersburg, even if I were to
give you money for the journey.... But it's time for me to see Marya
Timofyevna." And he got up from his chair.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but how about Marya Timofyevna?"

"Why, as I told you."

"Can it be true?"

"You still don't believe it?"

"Will you really cast me off like an old worn-out shoe?"

"I'll see," laughed Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. "Come, let me go."

"Wouldn't you like me to stand on the steps... for fear I might by
chance overhear something... for the rooms are small?"

"That's as well. Stand on the steps. Take my umbrella."

"Your umbrella.... Am I worth it?" said the captain over-sweetly.

"Anyone is worthy of an umbrella."

"At one stroke you define the minimum of human rights...."

But he was by now muttering mechanically. He was too much crushed by
what he had learned, and was completely thrown out of his reckoning. And
yet almost as soon as he had gone out on to the steps and had put up
the umbrella, there his shallow and cunning brain caught again the
ever-present, comforting idea that he was being cheated and deceived,
and if so they were afraid of him, and there was no need for him to be
afraid.

"If they're lying and deceiving me, what's at the bottom of it?" was the
thought that gnawed at his mind. The public announcement of the marriage
seemed to him absurd. "It's true that with such a wonder-worker anything
may come to pass; he lives to do harm. But what if he's afraid himself,
since the insult of Sunday, and afraid as he's never been before? And
so he's in a hurry to declare that he'll announce it himself, from fear
that I should announce it. Eh, don't blunder, Lebyadkin! And why does he
come on the sly, at night, if he means to make it public himself? And
if he's afraid, it means that he's afraid now, at this moment, for these
few days.... Eh, don't make a mistake, Lebyadkin!

"He scares me with Pyotr Stepanovitch. Oy, I'm frightened, I'm
frightened! Yes, this is what's so frightening! And what induced me to
blab to Liputin. Goodness knows what these devils are up to. I never can
make head or tail of it. Now they are all astir again as they were five
years ago. To whom could I give information, indeed? 'Haven't I written
to anyone in my foolishness?' H'm! So then I might write as though
through foolishness? Isn't he giving me a hint? 'You're going to
Petersburg on purpose.' The sly rogue. I've scarcely dreamed of it, and
he guesses my dreams. As though he were putting me up to going himself.
It's one or the other of two games he's up to. Either he's afraid
because he's been up to some pranks himself... or he's not afraid for
himself, but is simply egging me on to give them all away! Ach, it's
terrible, Lebyadkin! Ach, you must not make a blunder!"

He was so absorbed in thought that he forgot to listen. It was not easy
to hear either. The door was a solid one, and they were talking in a
very low voice. Nothing reached the captain but indistinct sounds. He
positively spat in disgust, and went out again, lost in thought, to
whistle on the steps.


III

Marya Timofyevna's room was twice as large as the one occupied by the
captain, and furnished in the same rough style; but the table in front
of the sofa was covered with a gay-coloured table-cloth, and on it a
lamp was burning. There was a handsome carpet on the floor. The bed was
