a husband.' 'I shan't leave the house,' I said, 'so it doesn't matter.'
'Then I shall call somebody and have you kicked out,' she cried. So then
I rushed at her, and beat her till she was bruised all over."

"Impossible!" cried the prince, aghast.

"I tell you it's true," said Rogojin quietly, but with eyes ablaze with
passion.

"Then for a day and a half I neither slept, nor ate, nor drank, and
would not leave her. I knelt at her feet: 'I shall die here,' I said,
'if you don't forgive me; and if you have me turned out, I shall drown
myself; because, what should I be without you now?' She was like a
madwoman all that day; now she would cry; now she would threaten me with
a knife; now she would abuse me. She called in Zaleshoff and Keller,
and showed me to them, shamed me in their presence. 'Let's all go to
the theatre,' she says, 'and leave him here if he won't go--it's not
my business. They'll give you some tea, Parfen Semeonovitch, while I
am away, for you must be hungry.' She came back from the theatre alone.
'Those cowards wouldn't come,' she said. 'They are afraid of you, and
tried to frighten me, too. "He won't go away as he came," they said,
"he'll cut your throat--see if he doesn't." Now, I shall go to my
bedroom, and I shall not even lock my door, just to show you how much
I am afraid of you. You must be shown that once for all. Did you have
tea?' 'No,' I said, 'and I don't intend to.' 'Ha, ha! you are playing
off your pride against your stomach! That sort of heroism doesn't sit
well on you,' she said.

"With that she did as she had said she would; she went to bed, and did
not lock her door. In the morning she came out. 'Are you quite mad?' she
said, sharply. 'Why, you'll die of hunger like this.' 'Forgive me,'
I said. 'No, I won't, and I won't marry you. I've said it. Surely you
haven't sat in this chair all night without sleeping?' 'I didn't
sleep,' I said. 'H'm! how sensible of you. And are you going to have no
breakfast or dinner today?' 'I told you I wouldn't. Forgive me!' 'You've
no idea how unbecoming this sort of thing is to you,' she said, 'it's
like putting a saddle on a cow's back. Do you think you are frightening
me? My word, what a dreadful thing that you should sit here and eat no
food! How terribly frightened I am!' She wasn't angry long, and didn't
seem to remember my offence at all. I was surprised, for she is a
vindictive, resentful woman--but then I thought that perhaps she
despised me too much to feel any resentment against me. And that's the
truth.

"She came up to me and said, 'Do you know who the Pope of Rome is?'
'I've heard of him,' I said. 'I suppose you've read the Universal
History, Parfen Semeonovitch, haven't you?' she asked. 'I've learned
nothing at all,' I said. 'Then I'll lend it to you to read. You must
know there was a Roman Pope once, and he was very angry with a certain
Emperor; so the Emperor came and neither ate nor drank, but knelt before
the Pope's palace till he should be forgiven. And what sort of vows do
you think that Emperor was making during all those days on his knees?
Stop, I'll read it to you!' Then she read me a lot of verses, where it
said that the Emperor spent all the time vowing vengeance against the
Pope. 'You don't mean to say you don't approve of the poem, Parfen
Semeonovitch,' she says. 'All you have read out is perfectly true,' say
I. 'Aha!' says she, 'you admit it's true, do you? And you are making
vows to yourself that if I marry you, you will remind me of all this,
and take it out of me.' 'I don't know,' I say, 'perhaps I was thinking
like that, and perhaps I was not. I'm not thinking of anything just
now.' 'What are your thoughts, then?' 'I'm thinking that when you rise
from your chair and go past me, I watch you, and follow you with my
eyes; if your dress does but rustle, my heart sinks; if you leave the
room, I remember every little word and action, and what your voice
sounded like, and what you said. I thought of nothing all last night,
but sat here listening to your sleeping breath, and heard you move a
little, twice.' 'And as for your attack upon me,' she says, 'I suppose
you never once thought of _that?_' 'Perhaps I did think of it, and perhaps
not,' I say. And what if I don't either forgive you or marry, you'
'I tell you I shall go and drown myself.' 'H'm!' she said, and then
relapsed into silence. Then she got angry, and went out. 'I suppose
you'd murder me before you drowned yourself, though!' she cried as she
left the room.

"An hour later, she came to me again, looking melancholy. 'I will marry
you, Parfen Semeonovitch,' she says, not because I'm frightened of you,
but because it's all the same to me how I ruin myself. And how can I do
it better? Sit down; they'll bring you some dinner directly. And if I
do marry you, I'll be a faithful wife to you--you need not doubt that.'
Then she thought a bit, and said, 'At all events, you are not a flunkey;
at first, I thought you were no better than a flunkey.' And she arranged
the wedding and fixed the day straight away on the spot.

"Then, in another week, she had run away again, and came here to
Lebedeff's; and when I found her here, she said to me, 'I'm not going to
renounce you altogether, but I wish to put off the wedding a bit longer
yet--just as long as I like--for I am still my own mistress; so you may
wait, if you like.' That's how the matter stands between us now. What do
you think of all this, Lef Nicolaievitch?"

"'What do you think of it yourself?" replied the prince, looking sadly
at Rogojin.

"As if I can think anything about it! I--" He was about to say more, but
stopped in despair.

The prince rose again, as if he would leave.

"At all events, I shall not interfere with you!" he murmured, as though
making answer to some secret thought of his own.

"I'll tell you what!" cried Rogojin, and his eyes flashed fire. "I can't
understand your yielding her to me like this; I don't understand it.
Have you given up loving her altogether? At first you suffered badly--I
know it--I saw it. Besides, why did you come post-haste after us? Out of
pity, eh? He, he, he!" His mouth curved in a mocking smile.

"Do you think I am deceiving you?" asked the prince.

"No! I trust you--but I can't understand. It seems to me that your pity
is greater than my love." A hungry longing to speak his mind out seemed
to flash in the man's eyes, combined with an intense anger.

"Your love is mingled with hatred, and therefore, when your love passes,
there will be the greater misery," said the prince. "I tell you this,
Parfen--"

"What! that I'll cut her throat, you mean?"

The prince shuddered.

"You'll hate her afterwards for all your present love, and for all the
torment you are suffering on her account now. What seems to me the most
extraordinary thing is, that she can again consent to marry you, after
all that has passed between you. When I heard the news yesterday, I
could hardly bring myself to believe it. Why, she has run twice
from you, from the very altar rails, as it were. She must have some
presentiment of evil. What can she want with you now? Your money?
Nonsense! Besides, I should think you must have made a fairly large hole
in your fortune already. Surely it is not because she is so very anxious
to find a husband? She could find many a one besides yourself. Anyone
would be better than you, because you will murder her, and I feel sure
she must know that but too well by now. Is it because you love her so
passionately? Indeed, that may be it. I have heard that there are women
who want just that kind of love... but still..." The prince paused,
reflectively.

"What are you grinning at my father's portrait again for?" asked
Rogojin, suddenly. He was carefully observing every change in the
expression of the prince's face.

"I smiled because the idea came into my head that if it were not for
this unhappy passion of yours you might have, and would have, become
just such a man as your father, and that very quickly, too. You'd have
settled down in this house of yours with some silent and obedient wife.
You would have spoken rarely, trusted no one, heeded no one, and thought
of nothing but making money."

"Laugh away! She said exactly the same, almost word for word, when she
saw my father's portrait. It's remarkable how entirely you and she are
at one now-a-days."

"What, has she been here?" asked the prince with curiosity.

"Yes! She looked long at the portrait and asked all about my father.
'You'd be just such another,' she said at last, and laughed. 'You have
such strong passions, Parfen,' she said, 'that they'd have taken you to
Siberia in no time if you had not, luckily, intelligence as well. For
you have a good deal of intelligence.' (She said this--believe it or
not. The first time I ever heard anything of that sort from her.) 'You'd
soon have thrown up all this rowdyism that you indulge in now, and you'd
have settled down to quiet, steady money-making, because you have little
education; and here you'd have stayed just like your father before you.
And you'd have loved your money so that you'd amass not two million,
like him, but ten million; and you'd have died of hunger on your money
bags to finish up with, for you carry everything to extremes.' There,
that's exactly word for word as she said it to me. She never talked to
me like that before. She always talks nonsense and laughs when she's
with me. We went all over this old house together. 'I shall change all
this,' I said, 'or else I'll buy a new house for the wedding.' 'No, no!'
she said, 'don't touch anything; leave it all as it is; I shall live
with your mother when I marry you.'

"I took her to see my mother, and she was as respectful and kind as
though she were her own daughter. Mother has been almost demented ever
since father died--she's an old woman. She sits and bows from her chair
to everyone she sees. If you left her alone and didn't feed her for
three days, I don't believe she would notice it. Well, I took her hand,
and I said, 'Give your blessing to this lady, mother, she's going to be
my wife.' So Nastasia kissed mother's hand with great feeling. 'She must
have suffered terribly, hasn't she?' she said. She saw this book here
lying before me. 'What! have you begun to read Russian history?' she
asked. She told me once in Moscow, you know, that I had better get
Solovieff's Russian History and read it, because I knew nothing. 'That's
good,' she said, 'you go on like that, reading books. I'll make you
a list myself of the books you ought to read first--shall I?' She had
never once spoken to me like this before; it was the first time I felt I
could breathe before her like a living creature."

"I'm very, very glad to hear of this, Parfen," said the prince, with
real feeling. "Who knows? Maybe God will yet bring you near to one
another."

"Never, never!" cried Rogojin, excitedly.

"Look here, Parfen; if you love her so much, surely you must be anxious
to earn her respect? And if you do so wish, surely you may hope to? I
said just now that I considered it extraordinary that she could still be
ready to marry you. Well, though I cannot yet understand it, I feel sure
she must have some good reason, or she wouldn't do it. She is sure
of your love; but besides that, she must attribute _something_ else to
you--some good qualities, otherwise the thing would not be. What you
have just said confirms my words. You say yourself that she found it
possible to speak to you quite differently from her usual manner. You
are suspicious, you know, and jealous, therefore when anything annoying
happens to you, you exaggerate its significance. Of course, of course,
she does not think so ill of you as you say. Why, if she did, she would
simply be walking to death by drowning or by the knife, with her eyes
wide open, when she married you. It is impossible! As if anybody would
go to their death deliberately!"

Rogojin listened to the prince's excited words with a bitter smile. His
conviction was, apparently, unalterable.

"How dreadfully you look at me, Parfen!" said the prince, with a feeling
of dread.

"Water or the knife?" said the latter, at last. "Ha, ha--that's exactly
why she is going to marry me, because she knows for certain that the
knife awaits her. Prince, can it be that you don't even yet see what's
at the root of it all?"

"I don't understand you."

"Perhaps he really doesn't understand me! They do say that you are
a--you know what! She loves another--there, you can understand that
much! Just as I love her, exactly so she loves another man. And that
other man is--do you know who? It's you. There--you didn't know that,
eh?"

"I?"

"You, you! She has loved you ever since that day, her birthday! Only
she thinks she cannot marry you, because it would be the ruin of you.
'Everybody knows what sort of a woman I am,' she says. She told me all
this herself, to my very face! She's afraid of disgracing and ruining
you, she says, but it doesn't matter about me. She can marry me all
right! Notice how much consideration she shows for me!"

"But why did she run away to me, and then again from me to--"

"From you to me? Ha, ha! that's nothing! Why, she always acts as though
she were in a delirium now-a-days! Either she says, 'Come on, I'll marry
you! Let's have the wedding quickly!' and fixes the day, and seems in a
hurry for it, and when it begins to come near she feels frightened; or
else some other idea gets into her head--goodness knows! you've seen
her--you know how she goes on--laughing and crying and raving! There's
nothing extraordinary about her having run away from you! She ran away
because she found out how dearly she loved you. She could not bear to be
near you. You said just now that I had found her at Moscow, when she ran
away from you. I didn't do anything of the sort; she came to me herself,
straight from you. 'Name the day--I'm ready!' she said. 'Let's have
some champagne, and go and hear the gipsies sing!' I tell you she'd
have thrown herself into the water long ago if it were not for me! She
doesn't do it because I am, perhaps, even more dreadful to her than the
water! She's marrying me out of spite; if she marries me, I tell you, it
will be for spite!"

"But how do you, how can you--" began the prince, gazing with dread and
horror at Rogojin.

"Why don't you finish your sentence? Shall I tell you what you were
thinking to yourself just then? You were thinking, 'How can she marry
him after this? How can it possibly be permitted?' Oh, I know what you
were thinking about!"

"I didn't come here for that purpose, Parfen. That was not in my mind--"

"That may be! Perhaps you didn't _come_ with the idea, but the idea is
certainly there _now!_ Ha, ha! well, that's enough! What are you upset
about? Didn't you really know it all before? You astonish me!"

"All this is mere jealousy--it is some malady of yours, Parfen! You
exaggerate everything," said the prince, excessively agitated. "What are
you doing?"

"Let go of it!" said Parfen, seizing from the prince's hand a knife
which the latter had at that moment taken up from the table, where it
lay beside the history. Parfen replaced it where it had been.

"I seemed to know it--I felt it, when I was coming back to Petersburg,"
continued the prince, "I did not want to come, I wished to forget all
this, to uproot it from my memory altogether! Well, good-bye--what is
the matter?"

He had absently taken up the knife a second time, and again Rogojin
snatched it from his hand, and threw it down on the table. It was a
plain looking knife, with a bone handle, a blade about eight inches long,
and broad in proportion, it did not clasp.

Seeing that the prince was considerably struck by the fact that he had
twice seized this knife out of his hand, Rogojin caught it up with
some irritation, put it inside the book, and threw the latter across to
another table.

"Do you cut your pages with it, or what?" asked Muishkin, still rather
absently, as though unable to throw off a deep preoccupation into which
the conversation had thrown him.

"Yes."

"It's a garden knife, isn't it?"

"Yes. Can't one cut pages with a garden knife?"

"It's quite new."

"Well, what of that? Can't I buy a new knife if I like?" shouted Rogojin
furiously, his irritation growing with every word.

The prince shuddered, and gazed fixedly at Parfen. Suddenly he burst out
laughing.

"Why, what an idea!" he said. "I didn't mean to ask you any of these
questions; I was thinking of something quite different! But my head is
heavy, and I seem so absent-minded nowadays! Well, good-bye--I can't
remember what I wanted to say--good-bye!"

"Not that way," said Rogojin.

"There, I've forgotten that too!"

"This way--come along--I'll show you."

IV.

They passed through the same rooms which the prince had traversed on his
arrival. In the largest there were pictures on the walls, portraits and
landscapes of little interest. Over the door, however, there was one of
strange and rather striking shape; it was six or seven feet in length,
and not more than a foot in height. It represented the Saviour just
taken from the cross.

The prince glanced at it, but took no further notice. He moved on
hastily, as though anxious to get out of the house. But Rogojin suddenly
stopped underneath the picture.

"My father picked up all these pictures very cheap at auctions, and so
on," he said; "they are all rubbish, except the one over the door, and
that is valuable. A man offered five hundred roubles for it last week."

"Yes--that's a copy of a Holbein," said the prince, looking at it again,
"and a good copy, too, so far as I am able to judge. I saw the picture
abroad, and could not forget it--what's the matter?"

Rogojin had dropped the subject of the picture and walked on. Of course
his strange frame of mind was sufficient to account for his conduct;
but, still, it seemed queer to the prince that he should so abruptly
drop a conversation commenced by himself. Rogojin did not take any
notice of his question.

"Lef Nicolaievitch," said Rogojin, after a pause, during which the two
walked along a little further, "I have long wished to ask you, do you
believe in God?"

"How strangely you speak, and how odd you look!" said the other,
involuntarily.

"I like looking at that picture," muttered Rogojin, not noticing,
apparently, that the prince had not answered his question.

"That picture! That picture!" cried Muishkin, struck by a sudden idea.
"Why, a man's faith might be ruined by looking at that picture!"

"So it is!" said Rogojin, unexpectedly. They had now reached the front
door.

The prince stopped.

"How?" he said. "What do you mean? I was half joking, and you took me up
quite seriously! Why do you ask me whether I believe in God?"

"Oh, no particular reason. I meant to ask you before--many people are
unbelievers nowadays, especially Russians, I have been told. You ought
to know--you've lived abroad."

Rogojin laughed bitterly as he said these words, and opening the door,
held it for the prince to pass out. Muishkin looked surprised, but went
out. The other followed him as far as the landing of the outer stairs,
and shut the door behind him. They both now stood facing one another, as
though oblivious of where they were, or what they had to do next.

"Well, good-bye!" said the prince, holding out his hand.

"Good-bye," said Rogojin, pressing it hard, but quite mechanically.

The prince made one step forward, and then turned round.

"As to faith," he said, smiling, and evidently unwilling to leave
Rogojin in this state--"as to faith, I had four curious conversations
in two days, a week or so ago. One morning I met a man in the train, and
made acquaintance with him at once. I had often heard of him as a very
learned man, but an atheist; and I was very glad of the opportunity of
conversing with so eminent and clever a person. He doesn't believe in
God, and he talked a good deal about it, but all the while it appeared
to me that he was speaking _outside the subject_. And it has always struck
me, both in speaking to such men and in reading their books, that they
do not seem really to be touching on that at all, though on the surface
they may appear to do so. I told him this, but I dare say I did not
clearly express what I meant, for he could not understand me.

"That same evening I stopped at a small provincial hotel, and it so
happened that a dreadful murder had been committed there the night
before, and everybody was talking about it. Two peasants--elderly men
and old friends--had had tea together there the night before, and were
to occupy the same bedroom. They were not drunk but one of them had
noticed for the first time that his friend possessed a silver watch
which he was wearing on a chain. He was by no means a thief, and was, as
peasants go, a rich man; but this watch so fascinated him that he could
not restrain himself. He took a knife, and when his friend turned his
back, he came up softly behind, raised his eyes to heaven, crossed
himself, and saying earnestly--'God forgive me, for Christ's sake!' he
cut his friend's throat like a sheep, and took the watch."

Rogojin roared with laughter. He laughed as though he were in a sort of
fit. It was strange to see him laughing so after the sombre mood he had
been in just before.

"Oh, I like that! That beats anything!" he cried convulsively, panting
for breath. "One is an absolute unbeliever; the other is such a
thorough--going believer that he murders his friend to the tune of a
prayer! Oh, prince, prince, that's too good for anything! You can't have
invented it. It's the best thing I've heard!"

"Next morning I went out for a stroll through the town," continued the
prince, so soon as Rogojin was a little quieter, though his laughter
still burst out at intervals, "and soon observed a drunken-looking
soldier staggering about the pavement. He came up to me and said,
'Buy my silver cross, sir! You shall have it for fourpence--it's real
silver.' I looked, and there he held a cross, just taken off his own
neck, evidently, a large tin one, made after the Byzantine pattern. I
fished out fourpence, and put his cross on my own neck, and I could see
by his face that he was as pleased as he could be at the thought that he
had succeeded in cheating a foolish gentleman, and away he went to
drink the value of his cross. At that time everything that I saw made
a tremendous impression upon me. I had understood nothing about Russia
before, and had only vague and fantastic memories of it. So I thought,
'I will wait awhile before I condemn this Judas. Only God knows what may
be hidden in the hearts of drunkards.'

"Well, I went homewards, and near the hotel I came across a poor woman,
carrying a child--a baby of some six weeks old. The mother was quite a
girl herself. The baby was smiling up at her, for the first time in its
life, just at that moment; and while I watched the woman she suddenly
crossed herself, oh, so devoutly! 'What is it, my good woman I asked
her. (I was never but asking questions then!) Exactly as is a mother's
joy when her baby smiles for the first time into her eyes, so is God's
joy when one of His children turns and prays to Him for the first time,
with all his heart!' This is what that poor woman said to me, almost
word for word; and such a deep, refined, truly religious thought it
was--a thought in which the whole essence of Christianity was expressed
in one flash--that is, the recognition of God as our Father, and of
God's joy in men as His own children, which is the chief idea of Christ.
She was a simple country-woman--a mother, it's true--and perhaps, who
knows, she may have been the wife of the drunken soldier!

"Listen, Parfen; you put a question to me just now. This is my reply.
The essence of religious feeling has nothing to do with reason, or
atheism, or crime, or acts of any kind--it has nothing to do with these
things--and never had. There is something besides all this, something
which the arguments of the atheists can never touch. But the principal
thing, and the conclusion of my argument, is that this is most clearly
seen in the heart of a Russian. This is a conviction which I have gained
while I have been in this Russia of ours. Yes, Parfen! there is work to
be done; there is work to be done in this Russian world! Remember what
talks we used to have in Moscow! And I never wished to come here at
all; and I never thought to meet you like this, Parfen! Well,
well--good-bye--good-bye! God be with you!"

He turned and went downstairs.

"Lef Nicolaievitch!" cried Parfen, before he had reached the next
landing. "Have you got that cross you bought from the soldier with you?"

"Yes, I have," and the prince stopped again.

"Show it me, will you?"

A new fancy! The prince reflected, and then mounted the stairs once
more. He pulled out the cross without taking it off his neck.

"Give it to me," said Parfen.

"Why? do you--"

The prince would rather have kept this particular cross.

"I'll wear it; and you shall have mine. I'll take it off at once."

"You wish to exchange crosses? Very well, Parfen, if that's the case,
I'm glad enough--that makes us brothers, you know."

The prince took off his tin cross, Parfen his gold one, and the exchange
was made.

Parfen was silent. With sad surprise the prince observed that the look
of distrust, the bitter, ironical smile, had still not altogether left
his newly-adopted brother's face. At moments, at all events, it showed
itself but too plainly,

At last Rogojin took the prince's hand, and stood so for some moments,
as though he could not make up his mind. Then he drew him along,
murmuring almost inaudibly,

"Come!"

They stopped on the landing, and rang the bell at a door opposite to
Parfen's own lodging.

An old woman opened to them and bowed low to Parfen, who asked her some
questions hurriedly, but did not wait to hear her answer. He led the
prince on through several dark, cold-looking rooms, spotlessly clean,
with white covers over all the furniture.

Without the ceremony of knocking, Parfen entered a small apartment,
furnished like a drawing-room, but with a polished mahogany partition
dividing one half of it from what was probably a bedroom. In one corner
of this room sat an old woman in an arm-chair, close to the stove. She
did not look very old, and her face was a pleasant, round one; but she
was white-haired and, as one could detect at the first glance, quite
in her second childhood. She wore a black woollen dress, with a black
handkerchief round her neck and shoulders, and a white cap with black
ribbons. Her feet were raised on a footstool. Beside her sat another old
woman, also dressed in mourning, and silently knitting a stocking; this
was evidently a companion. They both looked as though they never broke
the silence. The first old woman, so soon as she saw Rogojin and the
prince, smiled and bowed courteously several times, in token of her
gratification at their visit.

"Mother," said Rogojin, kissing her hand, "here is my great friend,
Prince Muishkin; we have exchanged crosses; he was like a real brother
to me at Moscow at one time, and did a great deal for me. Bless him,
mother, as you would bless your own son. Wait a moment, let me arrange
your hands for you."

But the old lady, before Parfen had time to touch her, raised her right
hand, and, with three fingers held up, devoutly made the sign of the
cross three times over the prince. She then nodded her head kindly at
him once more.

"There, come along, Lef Nicolaievitch; that's all I brought you here
for," said Rogojin.

When they reached the stairs again he added:

"She understood nothing of what I said to her, and did not know what I
wanted her to do, and yet she blessed you; that shows she wished to do
so herself. Well, goodbye; it's time you went, and I must go too."

He opened his own door.

"Well, let me at least embrace you and say goodbye, you strange fellow!"
cried the prince, looking with gentle reproach at Rogojin, and advancing
towards him. But the latter had hardly raised his arms when he dropped
them again. He could not make up his mind to it; he turned away from the
prince in order to avoid looking at him. He could not embrace him.

"Don't be afraid," he muttered, indistinctly, "though I have taken your
cross, I shall not murder you for your watch." So saying, he laughed
suddenly, and strangely. Then in a moment his face became transfigured;
he grew deadly white, his lips trembled, his eyes burned like fire. He
stretched out his arms and held the prince tightly to him, and said in a
strangled voice:

"Well, take her! It's Fate! She's yours. I surrender her.... Remember
Rogojin!" And pushing the prince from him, without looking back at him,
he hurriedly entered his own flat, and banged the door.

V.

It was late now, nearly half-past two, and the prince did not find
General Epanchin at home. He left a card, and determined to look up
Colia, who had a room at a small hotel near. Colia was not in, but he
was informed that he might be back shortly, and had left word that if he
were not in by half-past three it was to be understood that he had gone
to Pavlofsk to General Epanchin's, and would dine there. The prince
decided to wait till half-past three, and ordered some dinner. At
half-past three there was no sign of Colia. The prince waited until four
o'clock, and then strolled off mechanically wherever his feet should
carry him.

In early summer there are often magnificent days in St.
Petersburg--bright, hot and still. This happened to be such a day.

For some time the prince wandered about without aim or object. He did
not know the town well. He stopped to look about him on bridges, at
street corners. He entered a confectioner's shop to rest, once. He was
in a state of nervous excitement and perturbation; he noticed nothing
and no one; and he felt a craving for solitude, to be alone with his
thoughts and his emotions, and to give himself up to them passively. He
loathed the idea of trying to answer the questions that would rise up
in his heart and mind. "I am not to blame for all this," he thought to
himself, half unconsciously.

Towards six o'clock he found himself at the station of the
Tsarsko-Selski railway.

He was tired of solitude now; a new rush of feeling took hold of him,
and a flood of light chased away the gloom, for a moment, from his soul.
He took a ticket to Pavlofsk, and determined to get there as fast as he
could, but something stopped him; a reality, and not a fantasy, as he
was inclined to think it. He was about to take his place in a carriage,
when he suddenly threw away his ticket and came out again, disturbed and
thoughtful. A few moments later, in the street, he recalled something
that had bothered him all the afternoon. He caught himself engaged in
a strange occupation which he now recollected he had taken up at odd
moments for the last few hours--it was looking about all around him for
something, he did not know what. He had forgotten it for a while, half
an hour or so, and now, suddenly, the uneasy search had recommenced.

But he had hardly become conscious of this curious phenomenon, when
another recollection suddenly swam through his brain, interesting him
for the moment, exceedingly. He remembered that the last time he had
been engaged in looking around him for the unknown something, he was
standing before a cutler's shop, in the window of which were exposed
certain goods for sale. He was extremely anxious now to discover whether
this shop and these goods really existed, or whether the whole thing had
been a hallucination.

He felt in a very curious condition today, a condition similar to that
which had preceded his fits in bygone years.

He remembered that at such times he had been particularly absentminded,
and could not discriminate between objects and persons unless he
concentrated special attention upon them.

He remembered seeing something in the window marked at sixty copecks.
Therefore, if the shop existed and if this object were really in
the window, it would prove that he had been able to concentrate his
attention on this article at a moment when, as a general rule,
his absence of mind would have been too great to admit of any such
concentration; in fact, very shortly after he had left the railway
station in such a state of agitation.

So he walked back looking about him for the shop, and his heart beat
with intolerable impatience. Ah! here was the very shop, and there was
the article marked "60 cop." Of course, it's sixty copecks, he thought,
and certainly worth no more. This idea amused him and he laughed.

But it was a hysterical laugh; he was feeling terribly oppressed. He
remembered clearly that just here, standing before this window, he had
suddenly turned round, just as earlier in the day he had turned and
found the dreadful eyes of Rogojin fixed upon him. Convinced, therefore,
that in this respect at all events he had been under no delusion, he
left the shop and went on.

This must be thought out; it was clear that there had been no
hallucination at the station then, either; something had actually
happened to him, on both occasions; there was no doubt of it. But again
a loathing for all mental exertion overmastered him; he would not
think it out now, he would put it off and think of something else.
He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or rather immediately
preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two when his whole
heart, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to vigour and light; when
he became filled with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be
swept away for ever; these moments were but presentiments, as it were,
of the one final second (it was never more than a second) in which the
fit came upon him. That second, of course, was inexpressible. When his
attack was over, and the prince reflected on his symptoms, he used to
say to himself: "These moments, short as they are, when I feel such
extreme consciousness of myself, and consequently more of life than
at other times, are due only to the disease--to the sudden rupture of
normal conditions. Therefore they are not really a higher kind of life,
but a lower." This reasoning, however, seemed to end in a paradox,
and lead to the further consideration:--"What matter though it be only
disease, an abnormal tension of the brain, if when I recall and analyze
the moment, it seems to have been one of harmony and beauty in the
highest degree--an instant of deepest sensation, overflowing with
unbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic devotion, and completest life?"
Vague though this sounds, it was perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin,
though he knew that it was but a feeble expression of his sensations.

That there was, indeed, beauty and harmony in those abnormal moments,
that they really contained the highest synthesis of life, he could not
doubt, nor even admit the possibility of doubt. He felt that they were
not analogous to the fantastic and unreal dreams due to intoxication
by hashish, opium or wine. Of that he could judge, when the attack was
over. These instants were characterized--to define it in a word--by
an intense quickening of the sense of personality. Since, in the last
conscious moment preceding the attack, he could say to himself, with
full understanding of his words: "I would give my whole life for this
one instant," then doubtless to him it really was worth a lifetime.
For the rest, he thought the dialectical part of his argument of little
worth; he saw only too clearly that the result of these ecstatic moments
was stupefaction, mental darkness, idiocy. No argument was possible
on that point. His conclusion, his estimate of the "moment," doubtless
contained some error, yet the reality of the sensation troubled him.
What's more unanswerable than a fact? And this fact had occurred. The
prince had confessed unreservedly to himself that the feeling of intense
beatitude in that crowded moment made the moment worth a lifetime. "I
feel then," he said one day to Rogojin in Moscow, "I feel then as if I
understood those amazing words--'There shall be no more time.'" And he
added with a smile: "No doubt the epileptic Mahomet refers to that same
moment when he says that he visited all the dwellings of Allah, in less
time than was needed to empty his pitcher of water." Yes, he had often
met Rogojin in Moscow, and many were the subjects they discussed. "He
told me I had been a brother to him," thought the prince. "He said so
today, for the first time."

He was sitting in the Summer Garden on a seat under a tree, and his
mind dwelt on the matter. It was about seven o'clock, and the place was
empty. The stifling atmosphere foretold a storm, and the prince felt a
certain charm in the contemplative mood which possessed him. He found
pleasure, too, in gazing at the exterior objects around him. All the
time he was trying to forget some thing, to escape from some idea that
haunted him; but melancholy thoughts came back, though he would so
willingly have escaped from them. He remembered suddenly how he had been
talking to the waiter, while he dined, about a recently committed murder
which the whole town was discussing, and as he thought of it something
strange came over him. He was seized all at once by a violent desire,
almost a temptation, against which he strove in vain.

He jumped up and walked off as fast as he could towards the "Petersburg
Side." [One of the quarters of St. Petersburg.] He had asked someone, a
little while before, to show him which was the Petersburg Side, on the
banks of the Neva. He had not gone there, however; and he knew very
well that it was of no use to go now, for he would certainly not find
Lebedeff's relation at home. He had the address, but she must certainly
have gone to Pavlofsk, or Colia would have let him know. If he were to
go now, it would merely be out of curiosity, but a sudden, new idea had
come into his head.

However, it was something to move on and know where he was going. A
minute later he was still moving on, but without knowing anything. He
could no longer think out his new idea. He tried to take an interest in
all he saw; in the sky, in the Neva. He spoke to some children he met.
He felt his epileptic condition becoming more and more developed. The
evening was very close; thunder was heard some way off.

The prince was haunted all that day by the face of Lebedeff's nephew
whom he had seen for the first time that morning, just as one is haunted
at times by some persistent musical refrain. By a curious association
of ideas, the young man always appeared as the murderer of whom Lebedeff
had spoken when introducing him to Muishkin. Yes, he had read something
about the murder, and that quite recently. Since he came to Russia, he
had heard many stories of this kind, and was interested in them. His
conversation with the waiter, an hour ago, chanced to be on the subject
of this murder of the Zemarins, and the latter had agreed with him about
it. He thought of the waiter again, and decided that he was no fool, but
a steady, intelligent man: though, said he to himself, "God knows
what he may really be; in a country with which one is unfamiliar it is
difficult to understand the people one meets." He was beginning to have
a passionate faith in the Russian soul, however, and what discoveries he
had made in the last six months, what unexpected discoveries! But every
soul is a mystery, and depths of mystery lie in the soul of a Russian.
He had been intimate with Rogojin, for example, and a brotherly
friendship had sprung up between them--yet did he really know him?
What chaos and ugliness fills the world at times! What a self-satisfied
rascal is that nephew of Lebedeff's! "But what am I thinking," continued
the prince to himself. "Can he really have committed that crime? Did he
kill those six persons? I seem to be confusing things... how strange
it all is.... My head goes round... And Lebedeff's daughter--how
sympathetic and charming her face was as she held the child in her arms!
What an innocent look and child-like laugh she had! It is curious that I
had forgotten her until now. I expect Lebedeff adores her--and I really
believe, when I think of it, that as sure as two and two make four, he
is fond of that nephew, too!"

Well, why should he judge them so hastily! Could he really say what they
were, after one short visit? Even Lebedeff seemed an enigma today.
Did he expect to find him so? He had never seen him like that before.
Lebedeff and the Comtesse du Barry! Good Heavens! If Rogojin should
really kill someone, it would not, at any rate, be such a senseless,
chaotic affair. A knife made to a special pattern, and six people killed
in a kind of delirium. But Rogojin also had a knife made to a special
pattern. Can it be that Rogojin wishes to murder anyone? The prince
began to tremble violently. "It is a crime on my part to imagine
anything so base, with such cynical frankness." His face reddened with
shame at the thought; and then there came across him as in a flash
the memory of the incidents at the Pavlofsk station, and at the other
station in the morning; and the question asked him by Rogojin about
_the eyes_ and Rogojin's cross, that he was even now wearing; and the
benediction of Rogojin's mother; and his embrace on the darkened
staircase--that last supreme renunciation--and now, to find himself full
of this new "idea," staring into shop-windows, and looking round for
things--how base he was!

Despair overmastered his soul; he would not go on, he would go back to
his hotel; he even turned and went the other way; but a moment after he
changed his mind again and went on in the old direction.

Why, here he was on the Petersburg Side already, quite close to the
house! Where was his "idea"? He was marching along without it now. Yes,
his malady was coming back, it was clear enough; all this gloom and
heaviness, all these "ideas," were nothing more nor less than a fit
coming on; perhaps he would have a fit this very day.

But just now all the gloom and darkness had fled, his heart felt full of
joy and hope, there was no such thing as doubt. And yes, he hadn't
seen her for so long; he really must see her. He wished he could meet
Rogojin; he would take his hand, and they would go to her together. His
heart was pure, he was no rival of Parfen's. Tomorrow, he would go
and tell him that he had seen her. Why, he had only come for the sole
purpose of seeing her, all the way from Moscow! Perhaps she might be
here still, who knows? She might not have gone away to Pavlofsk yet.

Yes, all this must be put straight and above-board, there must be no
more passionate renouncements, such as Rogojin's. It must all be clear
as day. Cannot Rogojin's soul bear the light? He said he did not love
her with sympathy and pity; true, he added that "your pity is greater
than my love," but he was not quite fair on himself there. Kin! Rogojin
reading a book--wasn't that sympathy beginning? Did it not show that he
comprehended his relations with her? And his story of waiting day and
night for her forgiveness? That didn't look quite like passion alone.

And as to her face, could it inspire nothing but passion? Could her
face inspire passion at all now? Oh, it inspired suffering, grief,
overwhelming grief of the soul! A poignant, agonizing memory swept over
the prince's heart.

Yes, agonizing. He remembered how he had suffered that first day when he
thought he observed in her the symptoms of madness. He had almost fallen
into despair. How could he have lost his hold upon her when she ran away
from him to Rogojin? He ought to have run after her himself, rather than
wait for news as he had done. Can Rogojin have failed to observe, up
to now, that she is mad? Rogojin attributes her strangeness to other
causes, to passion! What insane jealousy! What was it he had hinted at
in that suggestion of his? The prince suddenly blushed, and shuddered to
his very heart.

But why recall all this? There was insanity on both sides. For him, the
prince, to love this woman with passion, was unthinkable. It would be
cruel and inhuman. Yes. Rogojin is not fair to himself; he has a large
heart; he has aptitude for sympathy. When he learns the truth, and finds
what a pitiable being is this injured, broken, half-insane creature, he
will forgive her all the torment she has caused him. He will become her
slave, her brother, her friend. Compassion will teach even Rogojin,
it will show him how to reason. Compassion is the chief law of human
existence. Oh, how guilty he felt towards Rogojin! And, for a few warm,
hasty words spoken in Moscow, Parfen had called him "brother," while
he--but no, this was delirium! It would all come right! That gloomy
Parfen had implied that his faith was waning; he must suffer dreadfully.
He said he liked to look at that picture; it was not that he liked
it, but he felt the need of looking at it. Rogojin was not merely a
passionate soul; he was a fighter. He was fighting for the restoration
of his dying faith. He must have something to hold on to and believe,
and someone to believe in. What a strange picture that of Holbein's is!
Why, this is the street, and here's the house, No. 16.

The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of
the house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria
Alexeyevna at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.

Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and
crafty, piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her
visitor's name, he refused at first to answer, but in a moment he
changed his mind, and left strict instructions that it should be given
to Nastasia Philipovna. The urgency of his request seemed to impress
Madame Filisoff, and she put on a knowing expression, as if to say, "You
need not be afraid, I quite understand." The prince's name evidently
was a great surprise to her. He stood and looked absently at her for a
moment, then turned, and took the road back to his hotel. But he went
away not as he came. A great change had suddenly come over him. He went
blindly forward; his knees shook under him; he was tormented by "ideas";
his lips were blue, and trembled with a feeble, meaningless smile. His
demon was upon him once more.

What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of
moisture, his knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a
cold gloom? Was it because he had just seen these dreadful eyes again?
Why, he had left the Summer Garden on purpose to see them; that had been
his "idea." He had wished to assure himself that he would see them once
more at that house. Then why was he so overwhelmed now, having seen them
as he expected? just as though he had not expected to see them! Yes,
they were the very same eyes; and no doubt about it. The same that he
had seen in the crowd that morning at the station, the same that he
had surprised in Rogojin's rooms some hours later, when the latter had
replied to his inquiry with a sneering laugh, "Well, whose eyes were
they?" Then for the third time they had appeared just as he was getting
into the train on his way to see Aglaya. He had had a strong impulse to
rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words of the morning "Whose eyes
are they?" Instead he had fled from the station, and knew nothing more,
until he found himself gazing into the window of a cutler's shop, and
wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost more than sixty
copecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden under a
lime-tree, a wicked demon had come and whispered in his car: "Rogojin
has been spying upon you and watching you all the morning in a frenzy
of desperation. When he finds you have not gone to Pavlofsk--a terrible
discovery for him--he will surely go at once to that house in Petersburg
Side, and watch for you there, although only this morning you gave
your word of honour not to see _her_, and swore that you had not come to
Petersburg for that purpose." And thereupon the prince had hastened off
to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin
there? He had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of
mind was gloomy and miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning
Rogojin had seemed to be trying to keep out of the way; but at the
station this afternoon he had stood out, he had concealed himself,
indeed, less than the prince himself; at the house, now, he had stood
fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with folded hands,
watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen. He had
stood there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a--a what?

And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead
of turning away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes
met? (Yes, their eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why,
he had himself wished to take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he
had himself determined to go to him on the morrow and tell him that he
had seen her, he had repudiated the demon as he walked to the house, and
his heart had been full of joy.

Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient
to justify the prince's terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon?
Something seen, but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful
presentiments? Yes, he was convinced of it--convinced of what? (Oh, how
mean and hideous of him to feel this conviction, this presentiment! How
he blamed himself for it!) "Speak if you dare, and tell me, what is the
presentiment?" he repeated to himself, over and over again. "Put it into
words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward that I
am!" The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. "How shall I
ever look this man in the face again? My God, what a day! And what a
nightmare, what a nightmare!"

There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the
Petersburg Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go
straight to Rogojin's, wait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and
contrition, and tell him of his distrust, and finish with it--once for
all.

But here he was back at his hotel.

How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing--its
corridor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it,
for some reason.

"What a regular old woman I am today," he had said to himself each time,
with annoyance. "I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes into
my head."

He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over
him. "I am a coward, a wretched coward," he said, and moved forward
again; but once more he paused.

Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the
exclusion of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained,
and he was no longer under the influence of a nightmare, he was able
to think of it calmly. It concerned the knife on Rogojin's table. "Why
should not Rogojin have as many knives on his table as he chooses?"
thought the prince, wondering at his suspicions, as he had done when he
found himself looking into the cutler's window. "What could it have to
do with me?" he said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to the
ground by a kind of paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the
stress of some humiliating recollection.

The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment
it was rendered doubly so by the fact that the thunder-storm had just
broken, and the rain was coming down in torrents.

And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close
to the stairs, apparently waiting.

There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was
standing back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but
the prince felt an irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and
that it was Rogojin. The man moved on up the stairs; a moment later the
prince passed up them, too. His heart froze within him. "In a minute or
two I shall know all," he thought.

The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along
which lay the guests' bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg
houses, it was narrow and very dark, and turned around a massive stone
column.

On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the
stairs allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide,
and in this niche the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed.
He thought he could distinguish a figure standing there. He would pass
by quickly and not look. He took a step forward, but could bear the
uncertainty no longer and turned his head.

The eyes--the same two eyes--met his! The man concealed in the niche had
also taken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.

Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round
towards the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.

Rogojin's eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his
countenance. His right hand was raised, and something glittered in it.
The prince did not think of trying to stop it. All he could remember
afterwards was that he seemed to have called out:

"Parfen! I won't believe it."

Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful
inner light illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet
he distinctly remembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange,
dreadful wail, which burst from his lips of its own accord, and which no
effort of will on his part could suppress.

Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out
everything.

He had fallen in an epileptic fit.


*****


As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially
the eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a
terrible cry breaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything
