and that he was so persuaded of it that he would perhaps have regretted
it if the story had turned out to be nonsense. "He wants to get
distinction in Petersburg," our wily Ilya Ilyitch thought to himself as
he left Von Lembke; "well, that just suits me."

But I am convinced that poor Andrey Antonovitch would not have desired
a rebellion even for the sake of distinguishing himself. He was a most
conscientious official, who had lived in a state of innocence up to the
time of his marriage. And was it his fault that, instead of an innocent
allowance of wood from the government and an equally innocent Minnchen,
a princess of forty summers had raised him to her level? I know almost
for certain that the unmistakable symptoms of the mental condition
which brought poor Andrey Antonovitch to a well-known establishment in
Switzerland, where, I am told, he is now regaining his energies,
were first apparent on that fatal morning. But once we admit that
unmistakable signs of something were visible that morning, it may well
be allowed that similar symptoms may have been evident the day before,
though not so clearly. I happen to know from the most private sources
(well, you may assume that Yulia Mihailovna later on, not in triumph
but _almost_ in remorse--for a woman is incapable of _complete_
remorse--revealed part of it to me herself) that Andrey Antonovitch had
gone into his wife's room in the middle of the previous night, past
two o'clock in the morning, had waked her up, and had insisted on her
listening to his "ultimatum." He demanded it so insistently that she
was obliged to get up from her bed in indignation and curl-papers,
and, sitting down on a couch, she had to listen, though with sarcastic
disdain. Only then she grasped for the first time how far gone her
Andrey Antonovitch was, and was secretly horrified. She ought to have
thought what she was about and have been softened, but she concealed her
horror and was more obstinate than ever. Like every wife she had her
own method of treating Andrey Antonovitch, which she had tried more than
once already and with it driven him to frenzy. Yulia Mihailovna's method
was that of contemptuous silence, for one hour, two, a whole day and
almost for three days and nights--silence whatever happened, whatever he
said, whatever he did, even if he had clambered up to throw himself
out of a three-story window--a method unendurable for a sensitive man!
Whether Yulia Mihailovna meant to punish her husband for his blunders of
the last few days and the jealous envy he, as the chief authority in the
town, felt for her administrative abilities; whether she was indignant
at his criticism of her behaviour with the young people and local
society generally, and lack of comprehension of her subtle and
far-sighted political aims; or was angry with his stupid and senseless
jealousy of Pyotr Stepanovitch--however that may have been, she made
up her mind not to be softened even now, in spite of its being three
o'clock at night, and though Andrey Antonovitch was in a state of
emotion such as she had never seen him in before.

Pacing up and down in all directions over the rugs of her boudoir,
beside himself, he poured out everything, everything, quite
disconnectedly, it's true, but everything that had been rankling in
his heart, for--"it was outrageous." He began by saying that he was a
laughing-stock to every one and "was being led by the nose."

"Curse the expression," he squealed, at once catching her smile, "let it
stand, it's true.... No, madam, the time has come; let me tell you it's
not a time for laughter and feminine arts now. We are not in the boudoir
of a mincing lady, but like two abstract creatures in a balloon who have
met to speak the truth." (He was no doubt confused and could not find
the right words for his ideas, however just they were.) "It is you,
madam, you who have destroyed my happy past. I took up this post
simply for your sake, for the sake of your ambition.... You smile
sarcastically? Don't triumph, don't be in a hurry. Let me tell you,
madam, let me tell you that I should have been equal to this position,
and not only this position but a dozen positions like it, for I have
abilities; but with you, madam, with you--it's impossible, for with
you here I have no abilities. There cannot be two centres, and you have
created two--one of mine and one in your boudoir--two centres of power,
madam, but I won't allow it, I won't allow it! In the service, as in
marriage, there must be one centre, two are impossible.... How have you
repaid me?" he went on. "Our marriage has been nothing but your proving
to me all the time, every hour, that I am a nonentity, a fool, and
even a rascal, and I have been all the time, every hour, forced in a
degrading way to prove to you that I am not a nonentity, not a fool at
all, and that I impress every one with my honourable character. Isn't
that degrading for both sides?"

At this point he began rapidly stamping with both feet on the carpet,
so that Yulia Mihailovna was obliged to get up with stern dignity. He
subsided quickly, but passed to being pathetic and began sobbing (yes,
sobbing!), beating himself on the breast almost for five minutes,
getting more and more frantic at Yulia Mihailovna's profound silence. At
last he made a fatal blunder, and let slip that he was jealous of Pyotr
Stepanovitch. Realising that he had made an utter fool of himself, he
became savagely furious, and shouted that he "would not allow them to
deny God" and that he would "send her _salon_ of irresponsible infidels
packing," that the governor of a province was bound to believe in God
"and so his wife was too," that he wouldn't put up with these young
men; that "you, madam, for the sake of your own dignity, ought to have
thought of your husband and to have stood up for his intelligence even
if he were a man of poor abilities (and I'm by no means a man of poor
abilities!), and yet it's your doing that every one here despises me, it
was you put them all up to it!" He shouted that he would annihilate
the woman question, that he would eradicate every trace of it, that
to-morrow he would forbid and break up their silly fête for the benefit
of the governesses (damn them!), that the first governess he came across
to-morrow morning he would drive out of the province "with a Cossack!
I'll make a point of it!" he shrieked. "Do you know," he screamed, "do
you know that your rascals are inciting men at the factory, and that I
know it? Let me tell you, I know the names of four of these rascals and
that I am going out of my mind, hopelessly, hopelessly!..."

But at this point Yulia Mihailovna suddenly broke her silence and
sternly announced that she had long been aware of these criminal
designs, and that it was all foolishness, and that he had taken it too
seriously, and that as for these mischievous fellows, she knew not only
those four but all of them (it was a lie); but that she had not the
faintest intention of going out of her mind on account of it, but, on
the contrary, had all the more confidence in her intelligence and hoped
to bring it all to a harmonious conclusion: to encourage the young
people, to bring them to reason, to show them suddenly and unexpectedly
that their designs were known, and then to point out to them new aims
for rational and more noble activity.

Oh, how can I describe the effect of this on Andrey Antonovitch! Hearing
that Pyotr Stepanovitch had duped him again and had made a fool of him
so coarsely, that he had told her much more than he had told him, and
sooner than him, and that perhaps Pyotr Stepanovitch was the chief
instigator of all these criminal designs--he flew into a frenzy.
"Senseless but malignant woman," he cried, snapping his bonds at one
blow, "let me tell you, I shall arrest your worthless lover at once, I
shall put him in fetters and send him to the fortress, or--I shall jump
out of a window before your eyes this minute!"

Yulia Mihailovna, turning green with anger, greeted this tirade at once
with a burst of prolonged, ringing laughter, going off into peals such
as one hears at the French theatre when a Parisian actress, imported for
a fee of a hundred thousand to play a coquette, laughs in her husband's
face for daring to be jealous of her.

Von Lembke rushed to the window, but suddenly stopped as though rooted
to the spot, folded his arms across his chest, and, white as a corpse,
looked with a sinister gaze at the laughing lady. "Do you know, Yulia,
do you know," he said in a gasping and suppliant voice, "do you know
that even I can do something?" But at the renewed and even louder
laughter that followed his last words he clenched his teeth, groaned,
and suddenly rushed, not towards the window, but at his spouse, with his
fist raised! He did not bring it down--no, I repeat again and again, no;
but it was the last straw. He ran to his own room, not knowing what he
was doing, flung himself, dressed as he was, face downwards on his bed,
wrapped himself convulsively, head and all, in the sheet, and lay so for
two hours--incapable of sleep, incapable of thought, with a load on his
heart and blank, immovable despair in his soul. Now and then he shivered
all over with an agonising, feverish tremor. Disconnected and irrelevant
things kept coming into his mind: at one minute he thought of the old
clock which used to hang on his wall fifteen years ago in Petersburg and
had lost the minute-hand; at another of the cheerful clerk, Millebois,
and how they had once caught a sparrow together in Alexandrovsky
Park and had laughed so that they could be heard all over the park,
remembering that one of them was already a college assessor. I imagine
that about seven in the morning he must have fallen asleep without being
aware of it himself, and must have slept with enjoyment, with agreeable
dreams.

Waking about ten o'clock, he jumped wildly out of bed remembered
everything at once, and slapped himself on the head; he refused his
breakfast, and would see neither Blum nor the chief of the police nor
the clerk who came to remind him that he was expected to preside over
a meeting that morning; he would listen to nothing, and did not want to
understand. He ran like one possessed to Yulia Mihailovna's part of the
house. There Sofya Antropovna, an old lady of good family who had lived
for years with Yulia Mihailovna, explained to him that his wife had set
off at ten o'clock that morning with a large company in three carriages
to Varvara Petrovna Stavrogin's, to Skvoreshniki, to look over the place
with a view to the second fête which was planned for a fortnight later,
and that the visit to-day had been arranged with Varvara Petrovna three
days before. Overwhelmed with this news, Andrey Antonovitch returned to
his study and impulsively ordered the horses. He could hardly wait for
them to be got ready. His soul was hungering for Yulia Mihailovna--to
look at her, to be near her for five minutes; perhaps she would glance
at him, notice him, would smile as before, forgive him... "O-oh! Aren't
the horses ready?" Mechanically he opened a thick book lying on the
table. (He sometimes used to try his fortune in this way with a book,
opening it at random and reading the three lines at the top of the
right-hand page.) What turned up was: _"Tout est pour le mieux dans
le meilleur des mondes possibles."_--Voltaire, _Candide._ He uttered
an ejaculation of contempt and ran to get into the carriage.
"Skvoreshniki!"

The coachman said afterwards that his master urged him on all the way,
but as soon as they were getting near the mansion he suddenly told him
to turn and drive back to the town, bidding him "Drive fast; please
drive fast!" Before they reached the town wall "master told me to stop
again, got out of the carriage, and went across the road into the field;
I thought he felt ill but he stopped and began looking at the flowers,
and so he stood for a time. It was strange, really; I began to feel
quite uneasy." This was the coachman's testimony. I remember the weather
that morning: it was a cold, clear, but windy September day; before
Andrey Antonovitch stretched a forbidding landscape of bare fields from
which the crop had long been harvested; there were a few dying yellow
flowers, pitiful relics blown about by the howling wind. Did he want to
compare himself and his fate with those wretched flowers battered by the
autumn and the frost? I don't think so; in fact I feel sure it was
not so, and that he realised nothing about the flowers in spite of the
evidence of the coachman and of the police superintendent, who drove up
at that moment and asserted afterwards that he found the governor with
a bunch of yellow flowers in his hand. This police superintendent,
Flibusterov by name, was an ardent champion of authority who had only
recently come to our town but had already distinguished himself and
become famous by his inordinate zeal, by a certain vehemence in the
execution of his duties, and his inveterate inebriety. Jumping out of
the carriage, and not the least disconcerted at the sight of what the
governor was doing, he blurted out all in one breath, with a frantic
expression, yet with an air of conviction, that "There's an upset in the
town."

"Eh? What?" said Andrey Antonovitch, turning to him with a stern face,
but without a trace of surprise or any recollection of his carriage and
his coachman, as though he had been in his own study.

"Police-superintendent Flibusterov, your Excellency. There's a riot in
the town."

"Filibusters?" Andrey Antonovitch said thoughtfully.

"Just so, your Excellency. The Shpigulin men are making a riot."

"The Shpigulin men!..."

The name "Shpigulin" seemed to remind him of something. He started and
put his finger to his forehead: "The Shpigulin men!" In silence, and
still plunged in thought, he walked without haste to the carriage,
took his seat, and told the coachman to drive to the town. The
police-superintendent followed in the droshky.

I imagine that he had vague impressions of many interesting things of
all sorts on the way, but I doubt whether he had any definite idea or
any settled intention as he drove into the open space in front of his
house. But no sooner did he see the resolute and orderly ranks of "the
rioters," the cordon of police, the helpless (and perhaps purposely
helpless) chief of police, and the general expectation of which he was
the object, than all the blood rushed to his heart. With a pale face he
stepped out of his carriage.

"Caps off!" he said breathlessly and hardly audibly. "On your knees!"
he squealed, to the surprise of every one, to his own surprise too, and
perhaps the very unexpectedness of the position was the explanation of
what followed. Can a sledge on a switchback at carnival stop short as it
flies down the hill? What made it worse, Andrey Antonovitch had been all
his life serene in character, and never shouted or stamped at anyone;
and such people are always the most dangerous if it once happens that
something sets their sledge sliding downhill. Everything was whirling
before his eyes.

"Filibusters!" he yelled still more shrilly and absurdly, and his voice
broke. He stood, not knowing what he was going to do, but knowing
and feeling in his whole being that he certainly would do something
directly.

"Lord!" was heard from the crowd. A lad began crossing himself; three or
four men actually did try to kneel down, but the whole mass moved three
steps forward, and suddenly all began talking at once: "Your
Excellency... we were hired for a term... the manager... you mustn't
say," and so on and so on. It was impossible to distinguish anything.

Alas! Andrey Antonovitch could distinguish nothing: the flowers were
still in his hands. The riot was as real to him as the prison carts
were to Stepan Trofimovitch. And flitting to and fro in the crowd
of "rioters" who gazed open-eyed at him, he seemed to see Pyotr
Stepanovitch, who had egged them on--Pyotr Stepanovitch, whom he hated
and whose image had never left him since yesterday.

"Rods!" he cried even more unexpectedly. A dead silence followed.

From the facts I have learnt and those I have conjectured, this must
have been what happened at the beginning; but I have no such exact
information for what followed, nor can I conjecture it so easily. There
are some facts, however.

In the first place, rods were brought on the scene with strange
rapidity; they had evidently been got ready beforehand in expectation
by the intelligent chief of the police. Not more than two, or at most
three, were actually flogged, however; that fact I wish to lay stress
on. It's an absolute fabrication to say that the whole crowd of rioters,
or at least half of them, were punished. It is a nonsensical story,
too, that a poor but respectable lady was caught as she passed by
and promptly thrashed; yet I read myself an account of this incident
afterwards among the provincial items of a Petersburg newspaper. Many
people in the town talked of an old woman called Avdotya Petrovna
Tarapygin who lived in the almshouse by the cemetery. She was said,
on her way home from visiting a friend, to have forced her way into the
crowd of spectators through natural curiosity. Seeing what was going on,
she cried out, "What a shame!" and spat on the ground. For this it was
said she had been seized and flogged too. This story not only appeared
in print, but in our excitement we positively got up a subscription for
her benefit. I subscribed twenty kopecks myself. And would you believe
it? It appears now that there was no old woman called Tarapygin living
in the almshouse at all! I went to inquire at the almshouse by the
cemetery myself; they had never heard of anyone called Tarapygin there,
and, what's more, they were quite offended when I told them the story
that was going round. I mention this fabulous Avdotya Petrovna because
what happened to her (if she really had existed) very nearly happened
to Stepan Trofimovitch. Possibly, indeed, his adventure may have been at
the bottom of the ridiculous tale about the old woman, that is, as the
gossip went on growing he was transformed into this old dame.

What I find most difficult to understand is how he came to slip away
from me as soon as he got into the square. As I had a misgiving of
something very unpleasant, I wanted to take him round the square
straight to the entrance to the governor's, but my own curiosity was
roused, and I stopped only for one minute to question the first person
I came across, and suddenly I looked round and found Stepan Trofimovitch
no longer at my side. Instinctively I darted off to look for him in the
most dangerous place; something made me feel that his sledge, too, was
flying downhill. And I did, as a fact, find him in the very centre of
things. I remember I seized him by the arm; but he looked quietly and
proudly at me with an air of immense authority.

_"Cher,"_ he pronounced in a voice which quivered on a breaking note, "if
they are dealing with people so unceremoniously before us, in an open
square, what is to be expected from that man, for instance... if he
happens to act on his own authority?"

And shaking with indignation and with an intense desire to defy them, he
pointed a menacing, accusing finger at Flibusterov, who was gazing at us
open-eyed two paces away.

"That man!" cried the latter, blind with rage. "What man? And who are
you?" He stepped up to him, clenching his fist. "Who are you?" he roared
ferociously, hysterically, and desperately. (I must mention that he
knew Stepan Trofimovitch perfectly well by sight.) Another moment and he
would have certainly seized him by the collar; but luckily, hearing him
shout, Lembke turned his head. He gazed intensely but with perplexity
at Stepan Trofimovitch, seeming to consider something, and suddenly
he shook his hand impatiently. Flibusterov was checked. I drew Stepan
Trofimovitch out of the crowd, though perhaps he may have wished to
retreat himself.

"Home, home," I insisted; "it was certainly thanks to Lembke that we
were not beaten."

"Go, my friend; I am to blame for exposing you to this. You have
a future and a career of a sort before you, while I--_mon heure est
sonnée._"

He resolutely mounted the governor's steps. The hall-porter knew me; I
said that we both wanted to see Yulia Mihailovna.

We sat down in the waiting-room and waited. I was unwilling to leave my
friend, but I thought it unnecessary to say anything more to him. He had
the air of a man who had consecrated himself to certain death for the
sake of his country. We sat down, not side by side, but in different
corners--I nearer to the entrance, he at some distance facing me, with
his head bent in thought, leaning lightly on his stick. He held his
wide-brimmed hat in his left hand. We sat like that for ten minutes.


II

Lembke suddenly came in with rapid steps, accompanied by the chief of
police, looked absent-mindedly at us and, taking no notice of us, was
about to pass into his study on the right, but Stepan Trofimovitch stood
before him blocking his way. The tall figure of Stepan Trofimovitch, so
unlike other people, made an impression. Lembke stopped.

"Who is this?" he muttered, puzzled, as if he were questioning the chief
of police, though he did not turn his head towards him, and was all the
time gazing at Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Retired college assessor, Stepan Trofimovitch Verhovensky, your
Excellency," answered Stepan Trofimovitch, bowing majestically. His
Excellency went on staring at him with a very blank expression, however.

"What is it?" And with the curtness of a great official he turned his
ear to Stepan Trofimovitch with disdainful impatience, taking him for an
ordinary person with a written petition of some sort.

"I was visited and my house was searched to-day by an official acting in
your Excellency's name; therefore I am desirous..."

"Name? Name?" Lembke asked impatiently, seeming suddenly to have an
inkling of something. Stepan Trofimovitch repeated his name still more
majestically.

"A-a-ah! It's... that hotbed... You have shown yourself, sir, in such a
light.... Are you a professor? a professor?"

"I once had the honour of giving some lectures to the young men of the X
university."

"The young men!" Lembke seemed to start, though I am ready to bet that
he grasped very little of what was going on or even, perhaps, did not
know with whom he was talking.

"That, sir, I won't allow," he cried, suddenly getting terribly angry.
"I won't allow young men! It's all these manifestoes? It's an assault
on society, sir, a piratical attack, filibustering.... What is your
request?"

"On the contrary, your wife requested me to read something to-morrow at
her fête. I've not come to make a request but to ask for my rights... ."

"At the fête? There'll be no fête. I won't allow your fête. A lecture? A
lecture?" he screamed furiously.

"I should be very glad if you would speak to me rather more politely,
your Excellency, without stamping or shouting at me as though I were a
boy."

"Perhaps you understand whom you are speaking to?" said Lembke, turning
crimson.

"Perfectly, your Excellency."

"I am protecting society while you are destroying it!... You... I
remember about you, though: you used to be a tutor in the house of
Madame Stavrogin?"

"Yes, I was in the position... of tutor... in the house of Madame
Stavrogin."

"And have been for twenty years the hotbed of all that has now
accumulated... all the fruits.... I believe I saw you just now in the
square. You'd better look out, sir, you'd better look out; your way of
thinking is well known. You may be sure that I keep my eye on you. I
cannot allow your lectures, sir, I cannot. Don't come with such requests
to me."

He would have passed on again.

"I repeat that your Excellency is mistaken; it was your wife who asked
me to give, not a lecture, but a literary reading at the fête to-morrow.
But I decline to do so in any case now. I humbly request that you will
explain to me if possible how, why, and for what reason I was subjected
to an official search to-day? Some of my books and papers, private
letters to me, were taken from me and wheeled through the town in a
barrow."

"Who searched you?" said Lembke, starting and returning to full
consciousness of the position. He suddenly flushed all over. He turned
quickly to the chief of police. At that moment the long, stooping, and
awkward figure of Blum appeared in the doorway.

"Why, this official here," said Stepan Trofimovitch, indicating him. Blum
came forward with a face that admitted his responsibility but showed no
contrition.

_"Vous ne faites que des bêtises,"_ Lembke threw at him in a tone of
vexation and anger, and suddenly he was transformed and completely
himself again.

"Excuse me," he muttered, utterly disconcerted and turning absolutely
crimson, "all this... all this was probably a mere blunder, a
misunderstanding... nothing but a misunderstanding."

"Your Excellency," observed Stepan Trofimovitch, "once when I was young
I saw a characteristic incident. In the corridor of a theatre a man ran
up to another and gave him a sounding smack in the face before the whole
public. Perceiving at once that his victim was not the person whom he
had intended to chastise but some one quite different who only slightly
resembled him, he pronounced angrily, with the haste of one whose
moments are precious--as your Excellency did just now--'I've made
a mistake... excuse me, it was a misunderstanding, nothing but a
misunderstanding.' And when the offended man remained resentful and
cried out, he observed to him, with extreme annoyance: 'Why, I tell you
it was a misunderstanding. What are you crying out about?'"

"That's... that's very amusing, of course"--Lembke gave a wry
smile--"but... but can't you see how unhappy I am myself?"

He almost screamed, and seemed about to hide his face in his hands.

This unexpected and piteous exclamation, almost a sob, was almost more
than one could bear. It was probably the first moment since the previous
day that he had full, vivid consciousness of all that had happened--and
it was followed by complete, humiliating despair that could not be
disguised--who knows, in another minute he might have sobbed aloud.
For the first moment Stepan Trofimovitch looked wildly at him; then he
suddenly bowed his head and in a voice pregnant with feeling pronounced:

"Your Excellency, don't trouble yourself with my petulant complaint, and
only give orders for my books and letters to be restored to me...."

He was interrupted. At that very instant Yulia Mihailovna returned and
entered noisily with all the party which had accompanied her. But at
this point I should like to tell my story in as much detail as possible.


III

In the first place, the whole company who had filled three carriages
crowded into the waiting-room. There was a special entrance to Yulia
Mihailovna's apartments on the left as one entered the house; but on
this occasion they all went through the waiting-room--and I imagine just
because Stepan Trofimovitch was there, and because all that had happened
to him as well as the Shpigulin affair had reached Yulia Mihailovna's
ears as she drove into the town. Lyamshin, who for some misdemeanour
had not been invited to join the party and so knew all that had been
happening in the town before anyone else, brought her the news. With
spiteful glee he hired a wretched Cossack nag and hastened on the way
to Skvoreshniki to meet the returning cavalcade with the diverting
intelligence. I fancy that, in spite of her lofty determination, Yulia
Mihailovna was a little disconcerted on hearing such surprising news,
but probably only for an instant. The political aspect of the affair,
for instance, could not cause her uneasiness; Pyotr Stepanovitch had
impressed upon her three or four times that the Shpigulin ruffians ought
to be flogged, and Pyotr Stepanovitch certainly had for some time past
been a great authority in her eyes. "But... anyway, I shall make him pay
for it," she doubtless reflected, the "he," of course, referring to
her spouse. I must observe in passing that on this occasion, as though
purposely, Pyotr Stepanovitch had taken no part in the expedition,
and no one had seen him all day. I must mention too, by the way, that
Varvara Petrovna had come back to the town with her guests (in the
same carriage with Yulia Mihailovna) in order to be present at the last
meeting of the committee which was arranging the fête for the next day.
She too must have been interested, and perhaps even agitated, by the
news about Stepan Trofimovitch communicated by Lyamshin.

The hour of reckoning for Andrey Antonovitch followed at once. Alas! he
felt that from the first glance at his admirable wife. With an open air
and an enchanting smile she went quickly up to Stepan Trofimovitch, held
out her exquisitely gloved hand, and greeted him with a perfect shower
of flattering phrases--as though the only thing she cared about that
morning was to make haste to be charming to Stepan Trofimovitch because
at last she saw him in her house. There was not one hint of the search
that morning; it was as though she knew nothing of it. There was not one
word to her husband, not one glance in his direction--as though he
had not been in the room. What's more, she promptly confiscated Stepan
Trofimovitch and carried him off to the drawing-room--as though he had
had no interview with Lembke, or as though it was not worth prolonging
if he had. I repeat again, I think that in this, Yulia Mihailovna,
in spite of her aristocratic tone, made another great mistake. And
Karmazinov particularly did much to aggravate this. (He had taken part
in the expedition at Yulia Mihailovna's special request, and in that way
had, incidentally, paid his visit to Varvara Petrovna, and she was so
poor-spirited as to be perfectly delighted at it.) On seeing Stepan
Trofimovitch, he called out from the doorway (he came in behind the
rest) and pressed forward to embrace him, even interrupting Yulia
Mihailovna.

"What years, what ages! At last..._excellent ami._"

He made as though to kiss him, offering his cheek, of course, and Stepan
Trofimovitch was so fluttered that he could not avoid saluting it.

_"Cher,"_ he said to me that evening, recalling all the events of that
day, "I wondered at that moment which of us was the most contemptible:
he, embracing me only to humiliate me, or I, despising him and his face
and kissing it on the spot, though I might have turned away.... Foo!"

"Come, tell me about yourself, tell me everything," Karmazinov drawled
and lisped, as though it were possible for him on the spur of the moment
to give an account of twenty-five years of his life. But this foolish
trifling was the height of "chic."

"Remember that the last time we met was at the Granovsky dinner in
Moscow, and that twenty-four years have passed since then..." Stepan
Trofimovitch began very reasonably (and consequently not at all in the
same "chic" style).

_"Ce cher homme,"_ Karmazinov interrupted with shrill familiarity,
squeezing his shoulder with exaggerated friendliness. "Make haste and
take us to your room, Yulia Mihailovna; there he'll sit down and tell us
everything."

"And yet I was never at all intimate with that peevish old woman,"
Stepan Trofimovitch went on complaining to me that same evening, shaking
with anger; "we were almost boys, and I'd begun to detest him even
then... just as he had me, of course."

Yulia Mihailovna's drawing-room filled up quickly. Varvara Petrovna
was particularly excited, though she tried to appear indifferent, but
I caught her once or twice glancing with hatred at Karmazinov and with
wrath at Stepan Trofimovitch--the wrath of anticipation, the wrath of
jealousy and love: if Stepan Trofimovitch had blundered this time and
had let Karmazinov make him look small before every one, I believe she
would have leapt up and beaten him. I have forgotten to say that
Liza too was there, and I had never seen her more radiant, carelessly
light-hearted, and happy. Mavriky Nikolaevitch was there too, of course.
In the crowd of young ladies and rather vulgar young men who made up
Yulia Mihailovna's usual retinue, and among whom this vulgarity was
taken for sprightliness, and cheap cynicism for wit, I noticed two or
three new faces: a very obsequious Pole who was on a visit in the town;
a German doctor, a sturdy old fellow who kept loudly laughing with great
zest at his own wit; and lastly, a very young princeling from Petersburg
like an automaton figure, with the deportment of a state dignitary and
a fearfully high collar. But it was evident that Yulia Mihailovna had a
very high opinion of this visitor, and was even a little anxious of the
impression her salon was making on him.

_"Cher M. Karmazinov,"_ said Stepan Trofimovitch, sitting in a picturesque
pose on the sofa and suddenly beginning to lisp as daintily as
Karmazinov himself, "_cher M. Karmazinov,_ the life of a man of our time
and of certain convictions, even after an interval of twenty-five years,
is bound to seem monotonous..."

The German went off into a loud abrupt guffaw like a neigh, evidently
imagining that Stepan Trofimovitch had said something exceedingly funny.
The latter gazed at him with studied amazement but produced no effect
on him whatever. The prince, too, looked at the German, turning head,
collar and all, towards him and putting up his pince-nez, though without
the slightest curiosity.

"... Is bound to seem monotonous," Stepan Trofimovitch intentionally
repeated, drawling each word as deliberately and nonchalantly as
possible. "And so my life has been throughout this quarter of a century,
_et comme on trouve partout plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I am
entirely of this opinion, it has come to pass that throughout this
quarter of a century I..."

_"C'est charmant, les moines,"_ whispered Yulia Mihailovna, turning to
Varvara Petrovna, who was sitting beside her.

Varvara Petrovna responded with a look of pride. But Karmazinov could
not stomach the success of the French phrase, and quickly and shrilly
interrupted Stepan Trofimovitch.

"As for me, I am quite at rest on that score, and for the past seven
years I've been settled at Karlsruhe. And last year, when it was
proposed by the town council to lay down a new water-pipe, I felt in
my heart that this question of water-pipes in Karlsruhe was dearer and
closer to my heart than all the questions of my precious Fatherland...
in this period of so-called reform."

"I can't help sympathising, though it goes against the grain," sighed
Stepan Trofimovitch, bowing his head significantly.

Yulia Mihailovna was triumphant: the conversation was becoming profound
and taking a political turn.

"A drain-pipe?" the doctor inquired in a loud voice.

"A water-pipe, doctor, a water-pipe, and I positively assisted them in
drawing up the plan."

The doctor went off into a deafening guffaw. Many people followed his
example, laughing in the face of the doctor, who remained unconscious of
it and was highly delighted that every one was laughing.

"You must allow me to differ from you, Karmazinov," Yulia Mihailovna
hastened to interpose. "Karlsruhe is all very well, but you are fond
of mystifying people, and this time we don't believe you. What Russian
writer has presented so many modern types, has brought forward so many
contemporary problems, has put his finger on the most vital modern
points which make up the type of the modern man of action? You, only
you, and no one else. It's no use your assuring us of your coldness
towards your own country and your ardent interest in the water-pipes of
Karlsruhe. Ha ha!"

"Yes, no doubt," lisped Karmazinov. "I have portrayed in the character
of Pogozhev all the failings of the Slavophils and in the character of
Nikodimov all the failings of the Westerners...."

"I say, hardly _all!_" Lyamshin whispered slyly.

"But I do this by the way, simply to while away the tedious hours and to
satisfy the persistent demands of my fellow-countrymen."

"You are probably aware, Stepan Trofimovitch," Yulia Mihailovna went on
enthusiastically, "that to-morrow we shall have the delight of hearing
the charming lines... one of the last of Semyon Yakovlevitch's exquisite
literary inspirations--it's called _Merci._ He announces in this piece
that he will write no more, that nothing in the world will induce him
to, if angels from Heaven or, what's more, all the best society were to
implore him to change his mind. In fact he is laying down the pen for
good, and this graceful _Merci_ is addressed to the public in grateful
acknowledgment of the constant enthusiasm with which it has for so many
years greeted his unswerving loyalty to true Russian thought."

Yulia Mihailovna was at the acme of bliss.

"Yes, I shall make my farewell; I shall say my _Merci_ and depart and
there... in Karlsruhe... I shall close my eyes." Karmazinov was gradually
becoming maudlin.

Like many of our great writers (and there are numbers of them amongst
us), he could not resist praise, and began to be limp at once, in spite
of his penetrating wit. But I consider this is pardonable. They say that
one of our Shakespeares positively blurted out in private conversation
that "we _great men_ can't do otherwise," and so on, and, what's more, was
unaware of it.

"There in Karlsruhe I shall close my eyes. When we have done our duty,
all that's left for us great men is to make haste to close our eyes
without seeking a reward. I shall do so too."

"Give me the address and I shall come to Karlsruhe to visit your tomb,"
said the German, laughing immoderately.

"They send corpses by rail nowadays," one of the less important young
men said unexpectedly.

Lyamshin positively shrieked with delight. Yulia Mihailovna frowned.
Nikolay Stavrogin walked in.

"Why, I was told that you were locked up?" he said aloud, addressing
Stepan Trofimovitch before every one else.

"No, it was a case of unlocking," jested Stepan Trofimovitch.

"But I hope that what's happened will have no influence on what I asked
you to do," Yulia Mihailovna put in again. "I trust that you will not
let this unfortunate annoyance, of which I had no idea, lead you to
disappoint our eager expectations and deprive us of the enjoyment of
hearing your reading at our literary matinée."

"I don't know, I... now..."

"Really, I am so unlucky, Varvara Petrovna... and only fancy, just when
I was so longing to make the personal acquaintance of one of the
most remarkable and independent intellects of Russia--and here Stepan
Trofimovitch suddenly talks of deserting us."

"Your compliment is uttered so audibly that I ought to pretend not to
hear it," Stepan Trofimovitch said neatly, "but I cannot believe that
my insignificant presence is so indispensable at your fête to-morrow.
However, I..."

"Why, you'll spoil him!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, bursting into the
room. "I've only just got him in hand--and in one morning he has been
searched, arrested, taken by the collar by a policeman, and here ladies
are cooing to him in the governor's drawing-room. Every bone in his body
is aching with rapture; in his wildest dreams he had never hoped for
such good fortune. Now he'll begin informing against the Socialists
after this!"

"Impossible, Pyotr Stepanovitch! Socialism is too grand an idea to
be unrecognised by Stepan Trofimovitch." Yulia Mihailovna took up the
gauntlet with energy.

"It's a great idea but its exponents are not always great men, _et
brisons-là, mon cher,_" Stepan Trofimovitch ended, addressing his son and
rising gracefully from his seat.

But at this point an utterly unexpected circumstance occurred. Von
Lembke had been in the room for some time but seemed unnoticed by
anyone, though every one had seen him come in. In accordance with her
former plan, Yulia Mihailovna went on ignoring him. He took up his
position near the door and with a stern face listened gloomily to the
conversation. Hearing an allusion to the events of the morning, he
began fidgeting uneasily, stared at the prince, obviously struck by his
stiffly starched, prominent collar; then suddenly he seemed to start on
hearing the voice of Pyotr Stepanovitch and seeing him burst in; and no
sooner had Stepan Trofimovitch uttered his phrase about Socialists than
Lembke went up to him, pushing against Lyamshin, who at once skipped out
of the way with an affected gesture of surprise, rubbing his shoulder
and pretending that he had been terribly bruised.

"Enough!" said Von Lembke to Stepan Trofimovitch, vigorously gripping
the hand of the dismayed gentleman and squeezing it with all his might
in both of his. "Enough! The filibusters of our day are unmasked. Not
another word. Measures have been taken...."

He spoke loudly enough to be heard by all the room, and concluded with
energy. The impression he produced was poignant. Everybody felt that
something was wrong. I saw Yulia Mihailovna turn pale. The effect was
heightened by a trivial accident. After announcing that measures had
been taken, Lembke turned sharply and walked quickly towards the door,
but he had hardly taken two steps when he stumbled over a rug, swerved
forward, and almost fell. For a moment he stood still, looked at the rug
at which he had stumbled, and, uttering aloud "Change it!" went out of
the room. Yulia Mihailovna ran after him. Her exit was followed by an
uproar, in which it was difficult to distinguish anything. Some said he
was "deranged," others that he was "liable to attacks"; others put their
fingers to their forehead; Lyamshin, in the corner, put his two fingers
above his forehead. People hinted at some domestic difficulties--in a
whisper, of course. No one took up his hat; all were waiting. I don't
know what Yulia Mihailovna managed to do, but five minutes later she
came back, doing her utmost to appear composed. She replied evasively
that Andrey Antonovitch was rather excited, but that it meant nothing,
that he had been like that from a child, that she knew "much better,"
and that the fête next day would certainly cheer him up. Then followed a
few flattering words to Stepan Trofimovitch simply from civility, and a
loud invitation to the members of the committee to open the meeting now,
at once. Only then, all who were not members of the committee prepared
to go home; but the painful incidents of this fatal day were not yet
over.

I noticed at the moment when Nikolay Stavrogin came in that Liza looked
quickly and intently at him and was for a long time unable to take her
eyes off him--so much so that at last it attracted attention. I saw
Mavriky Nikolaevitch bend over her from behind; he seemed to mean to
whisper something to her, but evidently changed his intention and drew
himself up quickly, looking round at every one with a guilty air. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch too excited curiosity; his face was paler than usual and
there was a strangely absent-minded look in his eyes. After flinging
his question at Stepan Trofimovitch he seemed to forget about him
altogether, and I really believe he even forgot to speak to his hostess.
He did not once look at Liza--not because he did not want to, but I am
certain because he did not notice her either. And suddenly, after the
brief silence that followed Yulia Mihailovna's invitation to open the
meeting without loss of time, Liza's musical voice, intentionally loud,
was heard. She called to Stavrogin.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, a captain who calls himself a relation of
yours, the brother of your wife, and whose name is Lebyadkin, keeps
writing impertinent letters to me, complaining of you and offering to
tell me some secrets about you. If he really is a connection of yours,
please tell him not to annoy me, and save me from this unpleasantness."

There was a note of desperate challenge in these words--every one
realised it. The accusation was unmistakable, though perhaps it was a
surprise to herself. She was like a man who shuts his eyes and throws
himself from the roof.

But Nikolay Stavrogin's answer was even more astounding.

To begin with, it was strange that he was not in the least surprised and
listened to Liza with unruffled attention. There was no trace of either
confusion or anger in his face. Simply, firmly, even with an air of
perfect readiness, he answered the fatal question:

"Yes, I have the misfortune to be connected with that man. I have been
the husband of his sister for nearly five years. You may be sure I will
give him your message as soon as possible, and I'll answer for it that
he shan't annoy you again."

I shall never forget the horror that was reflected on the face of
Varvara Petrovna. With a distracted air she got up from her seat,
lifting up her right hand as though to ward off a blow. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch looked at her, looked at Liza, at the spectators, and
suddenly smiled with infinite disdain; he walked deliberately out of the
room. Every one saw how Liza leapt up from the sofa as soon as he
turned to go and unmistakably made a movement to run after him. But she
controlled herself and did not run after him; she went quietly out of
the room without saying a word or even looking at anyone, accompanied,
of course, by Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who rushed after her.

The uproar and the gossip that night in the town I will not attempt to
describe. Varvara Petrovna shut herself up in her town house and Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, it was said, went straight to Skvoreshniki without
seeing his mother. Stepan Trofimovitch sent me that evening to _cette
chère amie_ to implore her to allow him to come to her, but she would not
see me. He was terribly overwhelmed; he shed tears. "Such a marriage!
Such a marriage! Such an awful thing in the family!" he kept repeating.
He remembered Karmazinov, however, and abused him terribly. He set
to work vigorously to prepare for the reading too and--the artistic
temperament!--rehearsed before the looking-glass and went over all the
jokes and witticisms uttered in the course of his life which he had
written down in a separate notebook, to insert into his reading next
day.

"My dear, I do this for the sake of a great idea," he said to me,
obviously justifying himself. "_Cher ami,_ I have been stationary for
twenty-five years and suddenly I've begun to move--whither, I know
not--but I've begun to move...."





PART III




CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART

The fête took place in spite of all the perplexities of the preceding
"Shpigulin" day. I believe that even if Lembke had died the previous
night, the fête would still have taken place next morning--so peculiar
was the significance Yulia Mihailovna attached to it. Alas! up to the
last moment she was blind and had no inkling of the state of public
feeling. No one believed at last that the festive day would pass without
some tremendous scandal, some "catastrophe" as some people expressed it,
rubbing their hands in anticipation. Many people, it is true, tried to
assume a frowning and diplomatic countenance; but, speaking generally,
every Russian is inordinately delighted at any public scandal and
disorder. It is true that we did feel something much more serious
than the mere craving for a scandal: there was a general feeling
of irritation, a feeling of implacable resentment; every one seemed
thoroughly disgusted with everything. A kind of bewildered cynicism, a
forced, as it were, strained cynicism was predominant in every one. The
only people who were free from bewilderment were the ladies, and they
were clear on only one point: their remorseless detestation of Yulia
Mihailovna. Ladies of all shades of opinion were agreed in this. And
she, poor dear, had no suspicion; up to the last hour she was persuaded
that she was "surrounded by followers," and that they were still
"fanatically devoted to her."

I have already hinted that some low fellows of different sorts had
made their appearance amongst us. In turbulent times of upheaval or
transition low characters always come to the front everywhere. I am
not speaking now of the so-called "advanced" people who are always in a
hurry to be in advance of every one else (their absorbing anxiety) and
who always have some more or less definite, though often very stupid,
aim. No, I am speaking only of the riff-raff. In every period of
transition this riff-raff, which exists in every society, rises to the
surface, and is not only without any aim but has not even a symptom of
an idea, and merely does its utmost to give expression to uneasiness and
impatience. Moreover, this riff-raff almost always falls unconsciously
under the control of the little group of "advanced people" who do act
with a definite aim, and this little group can direct all this rabble
as it pleases, if only it does not itself consist of absolute idiots,
which, however, is sometimes the case. It is said among us now that it
is all over, that Pyotr Stepanovitch was directed by the _Internationale,_
and Yulia Mihailovna by Pyotr Stepanovitch, while she controlled, under
his rule, a rabble of all sorts. The more sober minds amongst us wonder
at themselves now, and can't understand how they came to be so foolish
at the time.

What constituted the turbulence of our time and what transition it was
we were passing through I don't know, nor I think does anyone, unless
it were some of those visitors of ours. Yet the most worthless fellows
suddenly gained predominant influence, began loudly criticising
everything sacred, though till then they had not dared to open their
mouths, while the leading people, who had till then so satisfactorily
kept the upper hand, began listening to them and holding their peace,
some even simpered approval in a most shameless way. People like
Lyamshin and Telyatnikov, like Gogol's Tentyotnikov, drivelling
home-bred editions of Radishtchev, wretched little Jews with a mournful
but haughty smile, guffawing foreigners, poets of advanced tendencies
from the capital, poets who made up with peasant coats and tarred boots
for the lack of tendencies or talents, majors and colonels who ridiculed
the senselessness of the service, and who would have been ready for an
extra rouble to unbuckle their swords, and take jobs as railway clerks;
generals who had abandoned their duties to become lawyers; advanced
mediators, advancing merchants, innumerable divinity students, women
who were the embodiment of the woman question--all these suddenly gained
complete sway among us and over whom? Over the club, the venerable
officials, over generals with wooden legs, over the very strict and
inaccessible ladies of our local society. Since even Varvara Petrovna
was almost at the beck and call of this rabble, right up to the time
of the catastrophe with her son, our other local Minervas may well be
pardoned for their temporary aberration. Now all this is attributed,
as I have mentioned already, to the _Internationale._ This idea has taken
such root that it is given as the explanation to visitors from other
parts. Only lately councillor Kubrikov, a man of sixty-two, with the
Stanislav Order on his breast, came forward uninvited and confessed in
a voice full of feeling that he had beyond a shadow of doubt been for
fully three months under the influence of the _Internationale._ When with
every deference for his years and services he was invited to be more
definite, he stuck firmly to his original statement, though he could
produce no evidence except that "he had felt it in all his feelings," so
that they cross-examined him no further.

I repeat again, there was still even among us a small group who held
themselves aloof from the beginning, and even locked themselves up. But
what lock can stand against a law of nature? Daughters will grow up even
in the most careful families, and it is essential for grown-up daughters
to dance.

And so all these people, too, ended by subscribing to the governesses'
fund.

The ball was assumed to be an entertainment so brilliant, so
unprecedented; marvels were told about it; there were rumours of princes
from a distance with lorgnettes; of ten stewards, all young dandies,
with rosettes on their left shoulder; of some Petersburg people who
were setting the thing going; there was a rumour that Karmazinov had
consented to increase the subscriptions to the fund by reading his _Merci_
in the costume of the governesses of the district; that there would be
a literary quadrille all in costume, and every costume would symbolise
some special line of thought; and finally that "honest Russian thought"
would dance in costume--which would certainly be a complete novelty in
itself. Who could resist subscribing? Every one subscribed.


II

The programme of the fête was divided into two parts: the literary
matinée from midday till four o'clock, and afterwards a ball from ten
o'clock onwards through the night. But in this very programme there lay
concealed germs of disorder. In the first place, from the very beginning
a rumour had gained ground among the public concerning a luncheon
immediately after the literary matinée, or even while it was going
on, during an interval arranged expressly for it--a free luncheon, of
course, which would form part of the programme and be accompanied by
champagne. The immense price of the tickets (three roubles) tended to
confirm this rumour. "As though one would subscribe for nothing? The
fête is arranged for twenty-four hours, so food must be provided. People
will get hungry." This was how people reasoned in the town. I must admit
that Yulia Mihailovna did much to confirm this disastrous rumour by her
own heedlessness. A month earlier, under the first spell of the great
project, she would babble about it to anyone she met; and even sent a
paragraph to one of the Petersburg papers about the toasts and speeches
arranged for her fête. What fascinated her most at that time was
the idea of these toasts; she wanted to propose them herself and was
continually composing them in anticipation. They were to make clear what
was their banner (what was it? I don't mind betting that the poor dear
composed nothing after all), they were to get into the Petersburg and
Moscow papers, to touch and fascinate the higher powers and then to
spread the idea over all the provinces of Russia, rousing people to
wonder and imitation.

But for toasts, champagne was essential, and as champagne can't be
drunk on an empty stomach, it followed that a lunch was essential too.
Afterwards, when by her efforts a committee had been formed and had
attacked the subject more seriously, it was proved clearly to her at
once that if they were going to dream of banquets there would be very
little left for the governesses, however well people subscribed. There
were two ways out of the difficulty: either Belshazzar's feast with
toasts and speeches, and ninety roubles for the governesses, or a
considerable sum of money with the fête only as a matter of form to
raise it. The committee, however, only wanted to scare her, and had of
course worked out a third course of action, which was reasonable and
combined the advantages of both, that is, a very decent fête in every
respect only without champagne, and so yielding a very respectable sum,
much more than ninety roubles. But Yulia Mihailovna would not agree to
it: her proud spirit revolted from paltry compromise. She decided at
once that if the original idea could not be carried out they should rush
to the opposite extreme, that is, raise an enormous subscription that
would be the envy of other provinces. "The public must understand,"
she said at the end of her flaming speech to the committee, "that
the attainment of an object of universal human interest is infinitely
loftier than the corporeal enjoyments of the passing moment, that the
fête in its essence is only the proclamation of a great idea, and so we
ought to be content with the most frugal German ball simply as a symbol,
that is, if we can't dispense with this detestable ball altogether,"
so great was the aversion she suddenly conceived for it. But she was
pacified at last. It was then that "the literary quadrille" and the
