Industry Club -- Speech of January 27, 1932Dusseldorf, Industry ClubSPEECH OF JANUARY 27, 1932. . . IF TODAY the National Socialist Movement is regarded amongst widespread
  circles in Germany as being hostile to our business life, I believe the reason
  for this view is to be found in the fact that we adopted towards the events
  which determined the development leading to our present position an attitude
  which differed from that of all the other organizations which are of any
  importance in our public life. Even now our outlook differs in many points
  from that of our opponents....I regard it as of the first importance to break once and for all with the
  view that our destiny is conditioned by world events. It is not true that
  our distress has its final cause in a world crisis, in a world catastrophe:
  the true view is that we have reached a state of general crisis, because
  from the first certain mistakes were made. I must not say 'According to the
  general view the Peace Treaty of Versailles is the cause of our misfortune.'
  What is the Peace Treaty of Versailles but the work of men? It is not a burden
  which has been imposed or laid upon us by Providence. It is the work of men
  for which, it goes without saying, once again men with their merits or their
  failings must be held responsible. If this were not so, how should men ever
  be able to set aside this work at all? I am of the opinion that there is
  nothing which has been produced by the will of man which cannot in its turn
  be altered by another human will.Both the Peace Treaty of Versailles together with all the consequences of
  that Treaty have been the result of a policy which perhaps fifteen, fourteen,
  or thirteen years ago was regarded as the right policy, at least in the enemy
  States, but which from our point of view was bound to be regarded as fatal
  when ten or less years ago its true character was disclosed to millions of
  Germans and now today stands revealed in its utter impossibility. I am bound
  therefore to assert that there must of necessity have been in Germany, too,
  some responsibility for these happenings if I am to have any belief that
  the German people can exercise some influence towards changing these conditions.IT IS ALSO IN MY VIEW FALSE TO SAY THAT LIFE IN GERMANY TODAY IS SOLELY
  DETERMINED BY CONSIDERATIONS OF FOREIGN POLICY, that the primacy of foreign
  policy governs today the whole of our domestic life. Certainly a people can
  reach the point when foreign relations influence and determine completely
  its domestic life. But let no one say that such a condition is from the first
  either natural or desirable. Rather the important thing is that a people
  should create the conditions for a change in this state of affairs.If anyone says to me that its foreign politics is primarily decisive for
  the life of a people, then I must first ask: what then is the meaning of
  the term 'Politics'? There is a whole series of definitions. Frederick the
  Great said: 'Politics is the art of serving one's State with every means.'
  Bismarck's explanation was that 'Politics is the art of the Possible,' starting
  from the conception that advantage should be taken of every possibility to
  serve the State - and, in the later transformation of the idea of the State
  into the idea of nationalities, the Nation. Another considers that this service
  rendered to the people can be effected by military as well as peaceful action:
  for Clausewitz says that war is the continuation of politics though with
  different means. Conversely, Clemenceau considers that today peace is nothing
  but the continuation of war and the pursuing of the war-aim, though again
  with other means. To put it briefly: politics is nothing else and can be
  nothing else than the safeguarding of a people's vital interests and the
  practical waging of its life-battle with every means. Thus it is quite clear
  that this life-battle from the first has its starting-point in the people
  itself and that at the same time the people is the object - the real thing
  of value - which has to be preserved. All functions of this body formed by
  the people must in the last resort fulfill only one purpose - to secure in
  the future the maintenance of this body which is the people. I can therefore
  say neither that foreign policy nor economic policy is of primary significance.
  Of course, a people needs the business world in order to live. But business
  is but one of the functions of this body-politic whereby its existence is
  assured. But primarily the essential thing is the starting-point and that
  is the people itself....It is therefore false to say that foreign politics shapes a people: rather,
  peoples order their relations to the world about them in correspondence with
  their inborn forces and according to the measure in which their education
  enables them to bring those forces into play. We may be quite convinced that
  if in the place of the Germany of today there had stood a different Germany,
  the attitude towards the rest of the world would also have been different,
  and then presumably the influences exercised by the rest of the world would
  have taken a different form. To deny this would mean that Germany's destiny
  can no longer be changed no matter what Government rules in Germany....And as against this conception I am the champion of another standpoint: three
  factors, I hold, essentially determine a people's political life:First, the inner value of a people which as an inherited sum and possession
  is transmitted again and again through the generations, a value which suffers
  any change when the people, the custodian of this inherited possession, changes
  itself in its inner blood-conditioned composition. It is beyond question
  that certain traits of character, certain virtues, and certain vices always
  recur in peoples so long as their inner nature - their blood-conditioned
  composition - has not essentially altered. I can already trace the virtues
  and the vices of our German people in the writers of Rome just as clearly
  as I see them today. This inner value which determines the life of a people
  can be destroyed by nothing save only through a change in the blood causing
  a change in substance. Temporarily an illogical form of organization of life
  or unintelligent education may prejudice it. But in that case, though its
  effective action may be hindered, the fundamental value in itself is still
  present as it was before. And it is this value which is the great source
  of all hopes for a people's revival, it is this which justifies the belief
  that a people which in the course of thousands of years has furnished countless
  examples of the highest inner value cannot suddenly have lost overnight this
  inborn inherited value, but that one day this people will once again bring
  this value into action. If this were not the case, then the faith of millions
  of men in a better future - the mystic hope for a new Germany - would be
  incomprehensible. It would be incomprehensible how it was that this German
  people, at the end of the Thirty Years War, when its population had shrunk
  from eighteen to thirteen and one-half millions, could ever have once more
  formed the hope through work, through industry, and capacity to rise again,
  how in this completely crushed people hundreds of thousands and finally millions
  should have been seized with the longing for a re-formation of their State.
  . . .I said that this value can be destroyed. There are indeed in especial two
  other closely related factors which we can time and again trace in periods
  of national decline: the one is that for the conception of the value of
  personality there is substituted a levelling idea of the supremacy of mere
  numbers - democracy - and the other is the negation of the value of a people,
  the denial of any difference in the inborn capacity, the achievement, etc.,
  of individual peoples. Thus both factors condition one another or at least
  influence each other in the course of their development. Internationalism
  and democracy are inseparable conceptions. It is but logical that democracy,
  which within a people denies the special value of the individual and puts
  in its place a value which represents the sum of all individualities - a
  purely numerical value - should proceed in precisely the same way in the
  life of peoples and should in that sphere result in internationalism. Broadly
  it is maintained: peoples have no inborn values, but, at the most, there
  can be admitted perhaps temporary differences in education. Between Negroes,
  Aryans, Mongolians, and Redskins there is no essential difference in value.
  This view which forms the basis of the whole of the international thought-world
  of today and in its effects is carried to such lengths that in the end a
  Negro can sit as president in the sessions of the League of Nations leads
  necessarily as a further consequence to the point that in a similar way within
  a people differences in value between the individual members of this people
  are denied. And thus naturally every special capacity, every fundamental
  value of a people, can practically be made of no effect. For the greatness
  of a people is the result not of the sum of all its achievements but in the
  last resort of the sum of its outstanding achievements. Let no one say that
  the picture produced as a first impression of human civilization is the
  impression of its achievement as a whole. This whole edifice of civilization
  is in its foundations and in all its stones nothing else than the result
  of the creative capacity, the achievement, the intelligence, the industry,
  of individuals: in its greatest triumphs it represents the great crowning
  achievement of individual God-favored geniuses, in its average accomplishment
  the achievement of men of average capacity, and in its sum doubtless the
  result of the use of human labor-force in order to turn to account the creations
  of genius and of talent. So it is only natural that when the capable
  intelligences of a nation, which are always in a minority, are regarded only
  as of the same value as all the rest, then genius, capacity, the value of
  personality are slowly subjected to the majority and this process is then
  falsely named the rule of the people. For this is not rule of the people,
  but in reality the rule of stupidity, of mediocrity, of half-heartedness,
  of cowardice, of weakness, and of inadequacy....Thus democracy will in practice lead to the destruction of a people's true
  values. And this also serves to explain how It is that peoples with a great
  past from the time when they surrender themselves to the unlimited, democratic
  rule of the masses slowly lose their former position; for the
  outstanding-achievements of individuals which they still possess or which
  could be produced in all spheres of life are now rendered practically ineffective
  through the oppression of mere numbers. And thus in these conditions a people
  will gradually lose its importance not merely in the cultural and economic
  spheres but altogether, in a comparatively short time it will no longer,
  within the setting of the other peoples of the world, maintain its former
  value. . . .And to this there must be added a third factor: namely, the view that life
  in this world, after the denial of the value of personality and of the special
  value of a people, is not to be maintained through conflict. That is a conception
  which could perhaps be disregarded if it fixed itself only in the heads of
  individuals, but yet has appalling consequences because it slowly poisons
  an entire people. And it is not as if such general changes in men's outlook
  on the world remained only on the surface or were confined to their effects
  on men's minds. No, in course of time they exercise a profound influence
  and affect all expressions of a people's life.I may cite an example: you maintain, gentlemen, that German business life
  must be constructed on a basis of private property. Now such a conception
  as that of private property you can defend only if in some way or another
  it appears to have a logical foundation. This conception must deduce its
  ethical justification from an insight into the necessity which Nature dictates.
  It cannot simply be upheld by saying: 'It has always been so and therefore
  it must continue to be so.' For in periods of great upheavals within States,
  of movements of peoples and changes in thought, institutions and systems
  cannot remain untouched because they have previously been preserved without
  change. It is the characteristic feature of all really great revolutionary
  epochs in the history of mankind that they pay astonishingly little regard
  for forms which are hallowed only by age or which are apparently only so
  consecrated. It is thus necessary to give such foundations to traditional
  forms which are to be preserved that they can be regarded as absolutely
  essential, as logical and right. And then I am bound to say that private
  property can be morally and ethically justified only if I admit that men's
  achievements are different. Only on that basis can I assert: since men's
  achievements are different, the results of those achievements are also different.
  But if the results of those achievements are different, then it is reasonable
  to leave to men the administration of those results to a corresponding degree.
  It would not be logical to entrust the administration of the result of an
  achievement which was bound up with a personality either to the next best
  but less capable person or to a community which, through the mere fact that
  it had not performed the achievement, has proved that it is not capable of
  administering the result of that achievement. Thus it must be admitted that
  in the economic sphere, from the start, in all branches men are not of equal
  value or of equal importance. And once this is admitted it is madness to
  say: in the economic sphere there are undoubtedly differences in value, but
  that is not true in the political sphere. IT IS ABSURD TO BUILD UP ECONOMIC
  LIFE ON THE CONCEPTIONS OF ACHIEVEMENT, OF THE VALUE OF PERSONALITY, AND
  THEREFORE IN PRACTICE ON THE AUTHORITY OF PERSONALITY, BUT IN THE POLITICAL
  SPHERE TO DENY THE AUTHORITY OF PERSONALITY AND TO THRUST INTO ITS PLACE
  THE LAW OF THE GREATER NUMBER - DEMOCRACY. In that case there must slowly
  arise a cleavage between the economic and the political point of view, and
  to bridge that cleavage an attempt will be made to assimilate the former
  to the latter - indeed the attempt has been made, for this cleavage has not
  remained bare, pale theory. The conception of the equality of values has
  already, not only in politics but in economics also, been raised to a system,
  and that not merely in abstract theory: no! this economic system is alive
  in gigantic organizations and it has already today inspired a State which
  rules over immense areas.But I cannot regard it as possible that the life of a people should in the
  long run be based upon two fundamental conceptions. If the view is right
  that there are differences in human achievement, then it must also be true
  that the value of men in respect of the production of certain achievements
  is different It is then absurd to allow this principle to hold good only
  In one sphere - the sphere of economic life and its leadership - and to refuse
  to acknowledge its validity in the sphere of the whole life-struggle of a
  people - the sphere of politics. Rather the logical course is that if I recognize
  without qualification in the economic sphere the fact of special achievements
  as forming the condition of all higher culture, then in the same way I should
  recognize special achievement in the sphere of politics, and that means that
  I am bound to put in the forefront the authority of personality. If, on the
  contrary, it is asserted - and that, too, by those engaged in business -
  that in the political sphere special capacities are not necessary but that
  here an absolute equality in achievement reigns, then one day this same theory
  will be transferred from politics and applied to economic life. But in the
  economic sphere communism is analogous to democracy in the political sphere.
  We find ourselves today in a period in which these two fundamental principles
  are at grips in all spheres which come into contact with each other; already
  they are invading economics.To take an example: Life in practical activity is founded on the importance
  of personality: but now gradually it is threatened by the supremacy of mere
  numbers. But in the State there is an organization - the army - which cannot
  in any way be democratized without surrendering its very existence. But if
  a Weltanschauung cannot be applied to every sphere of a people's life, that
  fact in itself is sufficient proof of its weakness. In other words: the army
  can exist only if it maintains the absolutely undemocratic principle of
  unconditional authority proceeding downwards and absolute responsibility
  proceeding upwards, while, in contradistinction to this, democracy means
  in practice complete dependence proceeding downwards and authority proceeding
  upwards. But the result is that in a State in which the whole political life
  - beginning with the parish and ending with the Reichstag - is built up on
  the conception of democracy, the army is bound gradually to become an alien
  body and an alien body which must necessarily be felt to be such. It is for
  democracy an alien world of ideas, an alien Weltanschauung which inspires
  the life of this body. An internal conflict between the representatives of
  the democratic principle and the representatives of the principle of authority
  must be the inevitable consequence, and this conflict we are actually
  experiencing in Germany....So in the same way the education to pacifism must of necessity have its effect
  right through life until it reaches the humblest individual lives. The conception
  of pacifism is logical if I once admit a general equality amongst peoples
  and human beings. For in that case what sense is there in conflict? The
  conception of pacifism translated into practice and applied to all spheres
  must gradually lead to the destruction of the competitive instinct, to the
  destruction of the ambition for outstanding achievement. I cannot say: in
  politics we will be pacifists, we reject the idea of the necessity for life
  to safeguard itself through conflict - but in economics we want to remain
  keenly competitive. If I reject the idea of conflict as such, it is of no
  importance that for the time being that idea is still applied in some single
  spheres. In the last resort political decisions are decisive and determine
  achievement in the single sphere....To sum up the argument: I see two diametrically opposed principles: the principle
  of democracy which, wherever it is allowed practical effect is the principle
  of destruction: and the principle of the authority of personality which I
  would call the principle of achievement, because whatever man in the past
  has achieved - all human civilizations - is conceivable only if the supremacy
  of this principle is admitted.The worth of a people, the character of its internal organization through
  which this worth of a people may produce its effect, and the character of
  a people's education - these are the starting-points for political action:
  these are the foundations for the success of that action....That the evidences of a crisis should today spread over almost the entire
  world is comprehensible when one considers that the world has been opened
  up and mutual relations have been strengthened to an extent which fifty,
  eighty, or a hundred years ago appeared scarcely possible. And yet, despite
  this fact, one must not believe that such a state of affairs is conceivable
  only now, in the year 1932. No, similar conditions have been experienced
  more than once in the history of the world. Always when relations between
  peoples produced conditions such as these, the malady affecting these peoples
  was bound to spread and to influence the position of all.It is, of course, easy to say: we prefer to wait until there is a change
  in the general position, but that is impossible. For the position which faces
  you today is not the consequence of a revelation of God's will, but the result
  of human weaknesses, of human mistakes, of men's false judgments. It is but
  natural that there must first be a change in these causes, that men must
  first be inwardly transformed, before one can count on any alteration in
  the position.That conclusion is forced upon us if we look at the world today: we have
  a number of nations which through their inborn outstanding worth have fashioned
  for themselves a mode of life which stands in no relation to the life-space
  - the Lebensraum - which in their thickly populated settlements they inhabit.
  We have the so-called white race which, since the collapse of ancient
  civilization, in the course of some thousand years has created for itself
  a privileged position in the world. But I am quite unable to understand this
  privileged position, this economic supremacy, of the white race over the
  rest of the world if I do not bring it into close connection with a political
  conception of supremacy which has been peculiar to the white race for many
  centuries and has been regarded as in the nature of things: this conception
  it has maintained in its dealings with other peoples. Take any single area
  you like, take for example India. England did not conquer India by the way
  of justice and of law: she conquered India without regard to the wishes,
  to the views of the natives, or to their formulations of justice, and, when
  necessary, she has upheld this supremacy with the most brutal ruthlessness.
  Just in the same way Cortez or Pizarro annexed Central America and the northern
  states of South America, not on the basis of any claim of right, but from
  the absolute inborn feeling of the superiority of the white race. The settlement
  of the North American continent is just as little the consequence of any
  claim of superior right in any democratic or international sense; it was
  the consequence of a consciousness of right which was rooted solely in the
  conviction of the superiority and therefore of the right of the white race.
  If I think away this attitude of mind which in the course of the last three
  or four centuries has won the world for the white race, then the destiny
  of this race would in fact have been no different from that, say, of the
  Chinese: an immensely congested mass of human beings crowded upon an
  extraordinarily narrow territory, an over-population with all its unavoidable
  consequences. If Fate allowed the white race to take a different path, that
  is only because this white race was convinced that it had the right to organize
  the rest of the world. It matters not what superficial disguises in individual
  cases this right may have assumed, in practice it was the exercise. . . .Berlin, Reichstag -- Speech of January 30, 1937Berling, ReichstagSPEECH OF JANUARY 30, 1937MEN! Deputies of the German Reichstag! The Reichstag has met today on a day
  momentous for the German people. Four years have passed since the greatest
  national revolution and reformation that Germany has ever experienced began.
  These were the four years which I asked for as a trial period....I do not know whether there has ever been such a thorough revolution as ours,
  which nevertheless left unmolested numerous former political functionaries
  and allowed them to work in peace and paid pensions to its bitterest enemies.But our policy has not been of much use to us as far as other countries are
  concerned. Only a few months ago honorable British citizens felt they must
  make a protest to us for detaining in a concentration camp one of the most
  criminal subjects of Moscow. [Presumably Herr von Ossietzky, winner of the
  Nobel Peace Prize.] I do not know whether these honorable men have also protested
  against the slaying and burning of tens of thousands of men, women, and children
  in Spain. We are assured that the number of people slain in Spain is 170,000.
  On this basis we would have had the right to murder 400,000 to 500,000 people
  in the Nazi Revolution!The National Socialist program replaces the liberalistic conception of the
  individual by the conception of a people bound by their blood to the soil.
  Of all the tasks with which we are confronted, it is the grandest and most
  sacred task of man to preserve his race. This will not lead to an estrangement
  of the nations; on the contrary, it will lead for the first time to a mutual
  understanding. It will also prevent the Jewish people from trying to disintegrate
  and dominate other people under the mask of an innocent bourgeoisie.Within a few weeks the social prejudices of a thousand years were swept away.
  So great was the Revolution that its spiritual foundations have not been
  understood even today by a superficial world. They speak of democracies and
  dictatorships, and have not realized that in this country a Revolution has
  taken place that can be described as democratic in the highest sense of the
  word. Does a more glorious socialism or a truer democracy exist than that
  which enables any German boy to find his way to the head of the nation? The
  purpose of the Revolution was not to deprive a privileged class of its rights,
  but to raise a class without rights to equality....There is now only one representative of German sovereignty - the people itself.The will of the people finds its expression in the Party as its political
  organization.Therefore there is only one legislative body.There is only one executive authority.Therefore the people is the basis, and Party, State, Army, industry, justice,
  etc., are only the means of maintaining the people.In a new penal code, justice will be put for all time into the service of
  maintaining the German race.When I took over power there were more than 6,000,000 unemployed and the
  farmers seemed doomed to decay. Today you-must admit that I have fulfilled
  my promises. . .The Four-Year Plan will give permanent employment to those workmen who are
  now being released from the armament industry. It is significant for the
  gigantic economic development of our people that there is today a lack of
  trained workmen in many industries. There will be no strikes or lockouts
  in Germany, because every one has to serve the interests of the entire nation.Education of the people will never come to an end, and this education includes
  the Hitler Youth, the Labor Service, the Party, and the Army,, as well as
  books, newspapers, theaters, and films.The restoration of Germany's equality of status was an event which exclusively
  concerns Germany herself. We have never taken anything from any people or
  harmed any people. In this sense I will deprive the German railways and the
  Reichsbank of their former character and place both without reservation under
  the sovereignty of the Government.The time of so-called surprises has thus been ended.I solemnly withdraw the German signature from the declaration, extracted
  by force from a weak Government against its better judgment, that Germany
  was responsible for the War.The restoration of the honor of the German people was the most difficult
  and the most audacious task and work of my life.As an equal State, Germany is conscious of its European task to co-operate
  loyally in removing the problems which affect us and other nations. My views
  concerning these prob- lems can perhaps be most suitably stated by referring
  to the statements recently made by Mr. Eden in the House of Commons. I should
  like to express my sincere thanks for the opportunity of making a reply offered
  me by the frank and notable statement of the British Foreign Minister.I shall first try to correct what seems to me a most regrettable error -
  namely, that Germany never had any intention of isolating herself, of passing
  by the events of the rest of the world without sharing them, or that she
  does not want to pay any consideration to general necessities. I should like
  to assure Mr. Eden that we Germans do not in the least want to be isolated
  and that we do not feel at all that we are isolated. Our relations with most
  States are normal, and are very friendly with quite a number. I only call
  your attention to our agreement with Poland, our agreement with Austria,
  our excellent relations with Italy, our friendly relations with Hungary,
  Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Greece, Portugal, Spain, etc., and our no less friendly
  relations with a whole series of nations outside Europe. The agreement with
  Japan for fighting the Comintern is a virile proof of how little the German
  Government is thinking of isolating itself.Germany, and I solemnly repeat this here, has declared that there can be
  no humanly conceivable object of dispute whatsoever between Germany and France.The German Government has assured Belgium and Holland of its readiness to
  recognize and guarantee these States as untouchable and neutral regions for
  all time.From the economic point of view there is not the least reason to assert that
  Germany is giving up international cooperation.When I consider the speeches of many statesmen in the last few months, the
  impression may be obtained that the whole world is waiting to inundate Germany
  with economic favors, which we refuse to share. The German people have been
  making commercial treaties to bring about a more lively exchange of goods.
  German foreign trade has increased since 1932 both in volume and in value.I do not believe that there can be durable economic cooperation except on
  the basis of a new mutual exchange of goods. World economics are not suffering
  from any refusal of Germany to participate in them. When we got into power
  the world economic crisis was worse than today.I fear that I must interpret Mr. Eden's words as meaning that he sees in
  the carrying out of the Four-Year Plan a refusal of international relations
  on the part of Germany. The decision to carry out this plan does not allow
  of any change. Germany has an enormous number of people who do not only want
  to work but to eat. I cannot build the future of the German nation on the
  assurances of a foreign statesman or on any international help, but only
  on the real facts of production.If Europe does not awaken to the danger of bolshevist infection, commerce
  will decrease in spite of all the good will of individual statesmen. Therefore
  I am not in a position to judge the economic future of Europe as optimistically
  as Mr. Eden apparently does. I rejoice at every increase of our foreign trade,
  but in view of the political situation I shall not regret anything that will
  guarantee to the German people their existence when other nations have perhaps
  become the victims of bolshevist infection. The British Foreign Minister
  offers us theoretical prospects of existence, whereas in reality totally
  different things are happening - for instance, the revolutionizing of Spain
  has driven 15,000 Germans from the country and done great harm to our commerce.
  Should this revolutionizing of Spain spread to other European countries the
  damage would be increased....The League of Nations has never been a real league of peoples. A number of
  great nations do not belong to it or have left it, without anybody being
  able to assert that these countries were in favor of a policy of isolation.
  I think, therefore, that in this respect Mr. Eden misjudges Germany's intentions
  and views. I have already tried to bring about a good understanding in Europe,
  and I have especially assured the British people and Government how ardently
  we wish for sincere and hearty co-operation with them.The division into two parts, not only of Europe but of the rest of the world,
  is an accomplished fact. It is to be regretted that the British Government
  did not decide earlier that a division of Europe must be avoided under all
  circumstances, for then we would not have had a Treaty of Versailles.Secondly, division has been brought about by the proclamation of the bolshevist
  doctrine, the chief feature of which is to enforce itself on all peoples.
  For Mr. Eden, bolshevism is perhaps a thing which has its seat in Moscow,
  but for us it is a pestilence against which we have had to struggle at the
  cost of much bloodshed - a pestilence which tried to make of our country
  the same desert as Spain. National Socialism has not sought to conquer bolshevism
  in Russia, but Jewish International Moscow Bolshevists have tried to invade
  Germany and are still trying to. It is not suitable that National Socialist
  Germans should ever hope to protect bolshevism or that we should ever accept
  help from a bolshevist State.Three times I have made concrete offers for armament restriction or at least
  limitation. These offers were rejected....It would be better to mention in the first instance the armaments of that
  Power which is the basis of the armaments of all the others. Mr. Eden believes
  that in future all States should have only that armament which is necessary
  for their defense. I do not know whether Mr. Eden has already got into touch
  with Moscow about the realization of this fine idea or what assurances he
  has got there. I must, however, state one thing. It is absolutely clear that
  the amount of armaments for defense is determined by the degree of dangers
  which threaten a country. We cannot imagine anyone outside London being competent
  to estimate the strength necessary for the protection of the British Empire.
  The estimate of our need for protection is decided exclusively in Berlin.
  A general recognition of these principles would contribute to a lessening
  of the tension. Germany is happy to have found Italy and Japan to be of the
  same opinion. Nobody welcomed the apparent lessening of the tension in the
  Mediterranean brought about by the Anglo-Italian agreement more than we.Germany has no interest in Spain but the cultivation of those economic relations
  which Mr. Eden himself has described as so important and profitable.Germany has no colonial claims on countries which have taken no colonies
  away from her. Our sympathies with General Franco and his Government are
  in the first place of a general nature, but they are also based on the hope
  that the consolidation of a real National Spain may lead to a strengthening
  of the European economic system. We are ready to do everything which may
  lead to a restoration of orderly conditionsin Spain.During the last 100 years a number of new nations have arisen in Europe which,
  owing to their incapacity, have been of no economic importance and almost
  of no political significance. They have brought into the world new tensions.
  The new Italian State, however, is a reality. The German people and the German
  Reich are also a reality. The Polish people and State are also a reality.The unreasonable division of the world into peoples who have and peoples
  who have not does not remove or solve problems. If it is to be the task of
  the League of Nations only to guarantee the existing state of the world and
  to safeguard it for all time, then we might as well entrust it also with
  the task of guarding the high tide and the low tide, or of regulating for
  the future the direction of the Gulf Stream. Its continued existence depends
  on the extent to which it is realized that necessary reforms which concern
  the relations of the nations must be considered and put into practice.The German people once built up a Colonial Empire, without robbing anyone
  and without any war. This was taken away from us. It was said that the natives
  did not want to belong to Germany, that the colonies were not adminis- tered
  properly by the Germans, and that these colonies had no true value. If this
  is true, this valuelessness would also apply to the other nations, and there
  is no reason why they should wish to keep them from us. Germany has never
  demanded colonies for military purposes, but exclusively for economic ones.
  It is obvious that in times of general prosperity the value of certain
  territories may shrink, but it is just as clear that in time of distress
  such value changes. Today Germany lives in a time of fierce struggle for
  foodstuffs and raw materials. Sufficient imports are only conceivable if
  there is a continued increase in our exports. Therefore the demand for colonies
  for our densely populated country will again and again be raised as a matter
  of course.I should like to express a few opinions on possible ways of bringing about
  a genuine pacification of Europe, and beyond:-1. It is in the interests of all nations that individual countries should
  possess stable political and economic conditions. This is the most important
  condition for lasting and solid economic and political relations between
  the nations.2. The vital interests of the different nations must be frankly recognized.3. The League of Nations, to be effective, must be reformed and must become
  an organ of evolutionary common sense and not remain an organ of inactivity.4. The relations of the nations with one another can only be regulated and
  solved on a basis of mutual respect and absolute equality.5. It is impossible to make one nation responsible for armaments or another
  responsible for armaments limitation, but it is necessary to see this problem
  as it really is.6. It is impossible to maintain peace so long as an international, irresponsible
  clique continues its agitation un-checked. I greatly regret that the British
  Foreign Minister did not state categorically that there was not one word
  of truth in the calumnies about Morocco spread by these international war
  agitators. Thanks to the loyalty of a foreign diplomat and his Government,
  the immediate clearing up of this stirring case was made possible, but is
  it not conceivable that on another occasion it might not be possible to enable
  the truth to come to light so quickly, and what would happen then?7. It has been proved that European problems can be solved properly only
  within the limits of the possible. Germany is hoping to have close and friendly
  relations with Italy. May we succeed in paving the way for such relations
  with other European countries. The German Reich will watch over its security
  and honor with its strong Army. On the other hand, convinced that there can
  be no greater treasure for Europe than peace, it will always be a reasonable
  supporter of those European ideals of peace, and will be conscious of its
  responsibilities.8. It would be profitable to European peace as a whole if, in the treatment
  of the nationalities who are forced to live as minorities within other nations,
  mutual consideration were shown for national honor and consciousness. This
  would lead to a decisive lessening of tension between the nations who are
  forced to live side by side and whose State frontiers are not identical with
  the frontiers of the people.In concluding these remarks I should like to deal with the document which
  the British Government addressed to the German Government on the occasion
  of the occupation of the Rhineland. We are convinced that the British Government
  at that time did everything to lessen the tension, and that the document
  in question was intended to contribute to disentangling the situation.
  Nevertheless it was not possible for the German Government, for reasons which
  the British Government will certainly appreciate, to reply to those questions.We preferred to settle some of those questions in the most natural way by
  the practical improvement of our relations with our neighbors. I should like
  to state now that completeGerman sovereignty and equality have been restored, and that Germany will
  never sign a treaty which is in any way incompatible with the honor of the
  nation and of the Government which represents it, or which otherwise is
  incompatible with Germany's vital interests and therefore in the long run
  cannot be kept. With all my heart I hope that the intelligence and good will
  of responsible European governments will succeed, in spite of all opposition,
  in preserving peace for Europe. Peace is our dearest treasure....When I look upon the work of the past four years my first feeling is of gratitude
  to the Almighty who made it possible, and who has blessed our work and enabled
  us to pass through all obstacles.I have had three unusual friends in my life. ln my youth, poverty accompanied
  me for many years. When the Great War came to an end it was great sorrow
  that took hold of me and prescribed my path - sorrow at the collapse of our
  people. Since January 30 four years ago I have made the acquaintance of anxiety
  as the third friend - anxiety for the people and Reich which have been confided
  to my leadership. Since that time it has never left me, and in all probability
  will accompany me to my end. How could a man shoulder the burden of this
  anxiety if he had not faith in his mission and the consent of Him who stands
  above us?.Berlin: Proclamation To The German Nation -- February 1, 1933BERLIN: PROCLAMATION TO THE GERMAN NATIONFEBRUARY 1, 1933MORE than fourteen years have passed since the unhappy day when the German
  people, blinded by promises from foes at home and abroad, lost touch with
  honor and freedom, thereby losing all. Since that day of treachery, the Almighty
  has withheld his blessing from our people. Dissension and hatred descended
  upon us. With profound distress millions of the best German men and women
  from all walks of life have seen the unity of the nation vanishing away,
  dissolving in a confusion of political and personal opinions, economic interests,
  and ideological differences. Since that day, as so often in the past, Germany
  has presented a picture of heartbreaking disunity. We never received the
  equality and fraternity we had been promised, and we lost our liberty to
  boot. For when our nation lost its political place in the world, it soon
  lost its unity of spirit and will....We are firmly convinced that the German nation entered the fight in 1914
  without the slightest feeling of guilt on its part and filled only with the
  desire to defend the Fatherland which had been attacked and to preserve the
  freedom, nay, the very existence, of the German people. This being so, we
  can only see in the disastrous fate which has overtaken us since those November
  days of 1918 the result of our collapse at home. But the rest of the world,
  too, has suffered no less since then from overwhelming crises. The balance
  of power which had evolved in the course of history, and which formerly played
  no small part in bringing about the understanding of the necessity for an
  internal solidarity of the nations, with all its advantages for trade and
  commerce, has been set on one side. The insane conception of victors and
  vanquished destroyed the confidence existing between nations, and, at the
  same time, the industry of the entire world.The misery of our people is horrible to behold! Millions of the industrial
  proletariat are unemployed and starving; the whole of the middle class and
  the small artisans have been impoverished. When this collapse finally reaches
  the German peasants, we will be faced with an immeasurable disaster. For
  then not only shall a nation collapse, but a two-thousand-year-old inheritance,
  some of the loftiest products of human culture and civilization.All about us the warning signs of this collapse are apparent. Communism with
  its method of madness is making a powerful and insidious attack upon our
  dismayed and shattered nation. It seeks to poison and disrupt in order to
  hurl us into an epoch of chaos.... This negative, destroying spirit spared
  nothing of all that is highest and most valuable. Beginning with the family,
  it has undermined the very foundations of morality and faith and scoffs at
  culture and business, nation and Fatherland, justice and honor. Fourteen
  years of Marxism have ruined Germany; one year of bolshevism would destroy
  her. The richest and fairest territories of the world would be turned into
  a smoking heap of ruins. Even the sufferings of the last decade and a half
  could not be compared to the misery of a Europe in the heart of which the
  red flag of destruction had been hoisted. The thousands of wounded, the hundreds
  of dead which this inner strife has already cost Germany should be a warning
  of the storm which would come....In those hours when our hearts were troubled about the life and the future
  of the German nation, the aged leader of the World War appealed to us. He
  called to those of us in nationalist parties and leagues to struggle under
  him once more, in unity and loyalty, for the salvation of the German nation.
  This time the front lines are at home. The venerable Reichsprasident has
  allied himself with us in this noble endeavor. And as leaders of the nation
  and the national Government we vow to God, to our conscience, and to our
  people that we will faithfully and resolutely fulfill the task conferred
  upon us.The inheritance which has fallen to us is a terrible one. The task with which
  we are faced is the hardest which has fallen to German statesmen within the
  memory of man. But we are all filled with unbounded confidence for we believe
  in our people and their imperishable virtues. Every class and every individual
  must help us to found the new Reich.The National Government will regard it as its first and foremost duty to
  revive in the nation the spirit of unity and co-operation. It will preserve
  and defend those basic principles on which our nation has been built. It
  regards Christianity as the foundation of our national morality, and the
  family as the basis of national life....Turbulent instincts must be replaced by a national discipline as the guiding
  principle of our national life. All those institutions which are the strongholds
  of the energy and vitality of our nation will be taken under the special
  care of the Government.The National Government intends to solve the problem of the reorganization
  of trade and commerce with two four-year plans:The German farmer must be rescued in order that the nation may be supplied
  with the necessities of life....A concerted and all-embracing attack must be made on unemployment in order
  that the German working class may be saved from ruin....The November parties have ruined the German peasantry in fourteen years.In fourteen years they have created an army of millions of unemployed. The
  National Government will, with iron determination and unshakable steadfastness
  of purpose, put through the following plan:Within four years the German peasant must be rescued from the quagmire into
  which he has fallen.Within four years unemployment must be finally overcome. At the same time
  the conditions necessary for a revival in trade and commerce are provided.The National Government will couple with this tremendous task of reorganizing
  business life a reorganization of the administrative and fiscal systems of
  the Reich, of the Federal States, and the Communes.Only when this has been done can the idea of a continued federal existence
  of the entire Reich be fully realized....Compulsory labor-service and the back-to-the-land policy are two of the basic
  principles of this program.The securing of the necessities of life will include the performance of social
  duties to the sick and aged.In economical administration, the promotion of employment, the preservation
  of the farmer, as well as in the exploitation of individual initiative, the
  Government sees the best guarantee for the avoidance of any experiments which
  would endanger the currency.As regards its foreign policy the National Government considers its highest
  mission to be the securing of the right to live and the restoration of freedom
  to our nation. Its determination to bring to an end the chaotic state of
  affairs in Germany will assist in restoring to the community of nations a
  State of equal value and, above all, a State which must have equal rights.
  It is impressed with the importance of its duty to use this nation of equal
  rights as an instrument for the securing and maintenance of that peace which
  the world requires today more than ever before.May the good will of all others assist in the fulfillment of this our earnest
  wish for the welfare of Europe and of the whole world.Great as is our love for our Army as the bearer of our arms and the symbol
  of our great past, we should be happy if the world, by reducing its armaments,
  would see to it that we need never increase our own.If, however, Germany is to experience this political and economic revival
  and conscientiously fulfill her duties toward the other nations, one decisive
  step is absolutely necessary first: the overcoming of the destroying menace
  of communism in Germany. We of this Government feel responsible for the
  restoration of orderly life in the nation and for the final elimination of
  class madness and class struggle. We recognize no classes, we see only the
  German people, millions of peasants, bourgeois, and workers who will either
  overcome together the difficulties of these times or be overcome by them.
  We are firmly resolved and we have taken our oath. Since the present Reichstag
  is incapable of lending support to this work, we ask the German people whom
  we represent to perform the task themselves.Reichspr&auml;sident von Hindenburg has called upon us to bring about the
  revival of the German nation. Unity is our tool. Therefore we now appeal
  to the German people to support this reconciliation. The National Government
  wishes to work and it will work. It did not ruin the German nation for fourteen
  years, but now it will lead the nation back to health. It is determined to
  make well in four years the ills of fourteen years. But the National Government
  cannot make the work of reconstruction dependent upon the approval of those
  who wrought destruction. The Marxist parties and their lackeys have had fourteen
  years to show what they can do. The result is a heap of ruins.Now, people of Germany, give us four years and then pass judgment upon us.
  In accordance with Field Marshal von Hindenburg's command we shall begin
  now. May God Almighty give our work His blessing, strengthen our purpose,
  and endow us with wisdom and the trust of our people, for we are fighting
  not for ourselves but for Germany.Stuttgart -- Speech of February 15, 1933STUTTGARTSPEECH OF FEBRUARY 15, 1933. . . IN FOURTEEN years the system which has now been overthrown has piled
  mistake upon mistake, illusion upon illusion. And that is also true for our
  foreign policy. Only since the time when through our Movement the world has
  been shown that a new Germany of resolution and resistance is arising - only
  since then are we once more regarded with other eyes. If today in Geneva
  a people fights side by side with us for the freedom of Europe, it is we
  who have first formed this friendship and not the representatives of the
  former system.And now Staatspr&auml;sident Bolz says that Christianity and the Catholic
  faith are threatened by us. And to that charge I can answer: In the first
  place it is Christians and not international atheists who now stand at the
  head of Germany. I do not merely talk of Christianity, no, I also profess
  that I will never ally myself with the parties which destroy Christianity.
  If many wish today to take threatened Christianity under their protection,
  where, I would ask, was Christianity for them in these fourteen years when
  they went arm in arm with atheism? No, never and at no time was greater internal
  damage done to Christianity than in these fourteen years when a party,
  theoretically Christian, sat with those who denied God in one and the same
  Government.I would ask whether the economic policy of this now superseded system was
  a Christian policy. Was the inflation an undertaking for which Christians
  could answer, or has the destruction of German life, of the German peasant
  as well as of the middles classes, been Christian? . . . When these parties
  now say: we want to govern for a few more years in order that we can improve
  the situation, then we say:No! now it is too late for that! Besides, you had your fourteen years and
  you have failed. In fourteen years you have proved your incapacity - from
  the Treaty of Versailles by way of the various agreements down to the Dawes
  and Young plans. Herr Bolz, too, has given his support to the Young Plan
  while I have always opposed it.If today we are told that we have no program, then I answer that for the
  last two years this other Germany has lived only by making inroads on our
  thought-world. All these plans for the creation of work, for labor service,
  etc.- they are not the work of Staatspr&auml;sident Bolz, they come from
  our program of reconstruction from which they have taken them over imperfectly
  and incompletely.We are convinced that the restoration to health of our people must start
  from the restoration to health of the body politic itself, and we are persuaded
  of the truth that the future of our people, as in the past so now, lies first
  of all in the German peasant. If he perishes, our end has come; if he survives,
  then Germany will never go under. There lie the strength and the source of
  our people's life, the source of our renewal. The towns would not exist at
  all, if the peasant did not fill them with his blood. The dweller in our
  countryside may be primitive, but he is healthy.. . . We want, too, to restore to the German intelligentsia the freedom of
  which it has been robbed by the system which has hitherto ruled. In
  parliamentarianism they did not possess this freedom. We want to liberate
  Germany from the fetters of an impossible parliamentary democracy - not because
  we are terrorists, not because we intend to gag the free spirit. On the contrary,
  the spirit has never had more violence done to it than when mere numbers
  made themselves its master.No, our wish is that responsible folk should once more be brought together
  so that every class and every individual should be given that authority over
  those below and that responsibility towards those above which are essential
  if one is to build up the life of a community. We do not want so to educate
  the nation that it lives for ideas and artificial constructions; we want
  to test all ideas and constructions to discover how far they are capable
  of serving the nation's life.I will not build myself a villa in Switzerland, nor will I lay claim to any
  fund with which to fight criminality in this election campaign. Then after
  four years people shall judge whether the policy of ruining Germany has come
  to an end, whether Germany is rising once again.Munich -- Speech of February 24, 1941MUNICHSPEECH OF FEBRUARY 24, 1941Fellow Party Members:The twenty-fourth of February is always, and rightly so, a day of vivid memories
  for us. On this date and from this very hall began the Movement's amazing
  march to victory, which bore it to the helm of the Reich, to leadership of
  the nation and its destiny. This day is a great day for me too.Surely, it is seldom that a political leader can stand before the same band
  of followers that hailed his first great public appearance twenty-one years
  before, and repeat the same program. Seldom can a man proclaim the same doctrines
  and put them into practice for twenty-one years without at any time having
  had to relinquish a single part of his original program. In 1920, when we
  met for the first time in this hall, many of you must have asked yourselves:
  'Dear me, a new party, another new party! Why do we want a new party? Don't
  we have parties enough? . . .'Thus began a heroic struggle, opposed at its inception by nearly all.
  Nevertheless, the essential objects of the Movement embraced the decisive
  element. Its clear and unambiguous aim did not allow the Movement to become
  the tool of definite and limited individual interests, but raised it above
  all special obligations to the particular obligation of serving the German
  nation in its entirety, of safeguarding its interests regardless of momentary
  dissensions or confused thoughts. Thus, today, after twenty-one years, I
  again stand before you....It was in this very town that I began my struggle, my political struggle
  against Versailles. You know this, you old members of my party. How often
  did I speak against Versailles! I probably studied this treaty more than
  any other man. To this day, I have not forgotten it. The treaty could not
  be abolished by humility, by submission. It could only be abolished by reliance
  upon ourselves, by the strength of the German nation.The days of bitter struggle necessarily led to a selection of leaders. When
  today I appear before the nation and look at the ranks that surround me,
  I look at a band of men, real men who stand for something. On the other hand
  when I regard the cabinets of my opponents, I can only say: 'Quite incapable
  of being put in charge even of one of my smallest groups.' Hard times resulted
  in a selection of first class men who naturally caused us a little anxiety
  now and then. Everybody who is worth his salt is sometimes difficult to handle.
  In normal times it is not always easy to get divergent elements to work together
  instead of against one another. But as soon as danger threatens, they form
  the most resolute body of men. Just as selection is a natural consequence
  of war and brings real leaders to the fore among soldiers, so in the world
  of politics selection is the outcome of struggle. It was a result of this
  slow development, this eternal struggle against opposition, that we gradually
  acquired leaders with whose aid we can today achieve anything.When, on the other hand, I look at the rest of the world I am obliged to
  say: They were simply asleep while this miracle was taking place. Even today
  they refuse to grasp it. They do not realize what we are, nor do they realize
  what they themselves are. They go on like a figure of 'Justice' - with
  blindfolded eyes. They reject what does not suit them. They do not realize
  that two revolutions in Europe have created something new and tremendous.
  We are fully conscious of the fact that a second revolution, where the assumption
  of power occurred earlier than it did in our country, proceeded parallel
  with ours. The fascist Revolution, too, yielded the same results. Complete
  identity exists between our two revolutions, not only as regards aims, but
  also as regards methods. Over and above this there is our friendship, which
  is more than co-operation with a purpose in view. Nor do our opponents realize
  yet, that once I regard a man as my friend, I shall stand by him..... . . I wish to display no faltering in this matter. There cannot be the
  slightest doubt that the bond uniting the two revolutions, and especially
  the bond uniting their two leaders, is indissoluble, and that one will always
  support the other. Moreover, it is a common enemy whom we shall defeat.There was a time when Italy, fascist Italy, which is engaged in the same
  struggle as we are, which is shut in in the same way as we are, which is
  as over-populated as we are and, up until now, has been given no better chance
  of living than we, kept powerful enemies engaged in our behalf. Numerous
  British ships were engaged in the Mediterranean; numerous British airplanes
  were engaged in the African colonies. This was a very good thing for us,
  for, as I told you the other day, our warfare at sea is just beginning. The
  reason for this is that we first wanted to train new crews for the new submarines
  which will now make their appearance on the scene. Let no one doubt that
  they are about to appear.Just two hours ago I received a communique from the Commander-in-Chief of
  the Navy stating that the reports of the last two days from our ships and
  submarines on the high seas reveal that another 215,000 tons have been sunk;
  that of this total 190,000 tons were sunk by submarines alone, and that this
  figure includes a single convoy of 125,000 tons which was destroyed yesterday.From March and April on, those gentlemen will have to be prepared for something
  very different. They will see whether we have been asleep during the winter,
  or whether we have made good use of our time. During the long months when
  we had so few submarines to fight our battles, Italy kept large forces engaged.
  It does not matter to us whether our Stukas attack British ships in the North
  Sea or in the Mediterranean; the result is always the same. One thing is
  certain: Wherever Britain touches the Continent she will immediately have
  to reckon with us, and wherever British ships appear, our submarines will
  attack them until the hour of decision comes. Thus, except for Germany, only
  Italy has had a revolution which, in the long run, will lead, must lead and
  has led to the construction of a new national community.We had to exercise patience for many a long year, and I can only say: My
  opponents may believe that they can terrify me with the threat of time, but
  I have learned to wait,and I have never been idle while waiting. We had to wait ten years after
  1923 until we at last came into power. But you old members of the Party know
  that we accomplished much in those ten years.... We were never in the habit
  of setting ourselves a limit and saying: This must be done on March 1, or
  June 15, or September 7....These sharp-witted journalists who are now in England - they are no longer
  among us - knew all about it. Now they said: 'August 13 is the turning point;
  National Socialism is done for.' August 13 came - and National Socialism
  was not done for. A few months later they had to fix a new date. Finally
  came January 30, 1933. Then they said: 'Well, now they have made their mistake!
  They have gained power, and in six weeks they will be finished - three months
  at the most. Three months, and that will be the end of them.' The six weeks
  and the three months passed, and still we were not finished.And so they kept on fixing new dates for our downfall, and now, in wartime,
  they are doing exactly the same thing. And why not? They are the same people,
  the same prophets, the same political diviners who prophesied the future
  so wonderfully when they were here. Now they are employed as assistants in
  the British Ministry of Information and the British Foreign Office. They
  always know exactly that on such and such a date the Germans will be finished.
  We have experienced that more than once. You all know what they said. I need
  only refer to the celebrated utterance of a great British statesman whom
  you in Munich know by sight - Mr. Chamberlain. A few days before April 9,
  of last year, he said: 'Thank God, he has missed the bus.' I can remind you
  of another - the British Commander-in-Chief - who said: 'A few months ago
  I was afraid, now I am afraid no longer. They have missed their opportunity.
  Besides, they only have young generals. That is their mistake and their
  misfortune; it is the same with all their leaders. They have lost their
  opportunity. It is all over.' A few weeks later this general had departed.
  Probably he, too, was too young.Today they are doing exactly the same thing. They always fix final dates.
  In the autumn they said: 'If they don't land now, all is well. In the spring
  of 1941 Britain will transfer the offensive to the Continent.' I am still
  waiting for the British offensive. They have transferred the offensive elsewhere,
  and now, unfortunately, we must run after them wherever they happen to be.
  But we shall find them wherever they run. And we shall strike them where
  they are most vulnerable.Thus, twenty-one years of a dauntless struggle for our Movement have passed.
  After thirteen years we at last came to power. Then came years of preparation
  of our foreign policy, of gigantic work at home. You know that it is all
  an exact repetition of what happened in the Party. We asked nothing of the
  world but equal rights, just as we asked for the same rights at home. At
  home we demanded the right to meet freely, the right which the others possessed.
  We demanded the right of free speech, the same right as a parliamentary party
  as the others held. We were refused and persecuted with terrorism. Nevertheless,
  we built up our organization and won the day....Of course, a fundamental social principle was necessary to achieve this.
  It is today no longer possible to build up a state on a capitalistic basis.
  The peoples eventually begin to stir. The awakening of the peoples cannot
  be prevented by wars. On the contrary, war will only hasten it. Such states
  will be ruined by financial catastrophes which will destroy the foundations
  of their own former financial policy.The gold standard will not emerge victorious from this war. Rather, the national
  economic systems will conquer. And these will carry on among themselves the
  trade that is necessary for them. . .In this respect we can look to the future with confidence. Germany is an
  immense factor in world economy, not only as a producer but also as a consumer.
  We certainly have a great market for our goods. But we are not only seeking
  markets; we are also the greatest buyers. The Western world wants, on the
  one hand, to live upon its empires and, on the other hand, to export from
  its empires as well. That is impossible because in the long run the nations
  cannot carry on one-sided trade. They not only have to buy, but also have
  to sell. They can sell nothing to these empires. The peoples will therefore
  trade with us in the future, regardless of whether this happens to suit certain
  bankers or not. Therefore we will not establish our economic policy to suit
  the conceptions or desires of bankers in New York or London....Our economic policy, I repeat, is determined solely by the interests of the
  German people. From this principle we shall never depart. If the rest of
  the world says: 'War,' I can only say: 'Very well. I do not want war, but
  no one, however peaceable, can live in peace if his neighbor intends to force
  a quarrel.'I am not one of those who see such a war coming and start whining about it.
  I have said and done all that I could; I have made proposal after proposal
  to Britain; likewise to France. These proposals were always ridiculed - rejected
  with scorn. However, when I saw that the other side intended to fight, I
  naturally did that which as a National Socialist of the early days, I did
  once before: I forged a powerful weapon of defense. And, just as of old,
  I proclaimed that we should be not merely strong enough to stand the blows
  of others but strong enough to deal blows in return. I built up the German
  armed forces as a military instrument of State policy, so that if war were
  inevitable, these forces could deliver crushing blows.Only a few days ago, an American general declared before an investigating
  committee in the House of Representatives that in 1936 Churchill had personally
  assured him, 'Germany is becoming too strong for us. She must be destroyed,
  and I will do everything in my power to bring about her destruction.'A little later than 1936, I publicly issued a warning against this man and
  his activities for the first time. When I noticed that a certain British
  clique, incited by the Jews - who are, of course, the fellows who kindle
  the flames everywhere - was intentionally provoking war, I immediately made
  all preparations on my part to arm the nation. And you, my old Party comrades,
  know that when I speak it is not a mere matter of words, for I act accordingly.
  We worked like Titans. The armaments we have manufactured in the past few
  years are really the proudest achievement that the world has ever seen. If
  the rest of the world tells us: 'We are doing likewise now,' I can only reply:
  'By all means do so, for I have already done it. But above all, don't tell
  me any of your tales. I am an expert, a specialist in rearmament. I know
  exactly what can be made from steel and what can be made of aluminum. I know
  what achievements can be expected of men and what cannot be expected. Your
  tales do not impress me in the least. I enlisted the strength of the whole
  German nation in good time to assist in our arming and, if necessary, I shall
  enlist that of half Europe. I am prepared for all impending conflicts and
  consequently face them calmly.' Let the others face them with equal calm.I place my confidence in the best army in the world, in the best army which
  the German nation has ever possessed. It is numerically strong, it has the
  finest weapons and is better led than ever before. We have a body of young
  leaders who have not merely proved their worth in the present war but, I
  can well say, have covered themselves with glory. Wherever we look today,
  we see a bodyguard of chosen men to whom the German soldiers have been entrusted.
  They in their turn are the leaders of soldiers who are the best trained in
  the world, who are armed with the finest weapons on earth. Behind these soldiers
  and their leaders stands the German nation, the whole German peopleIn the midst of this people, forming its very core, is the National Socialist
  Movement which began its existence in this room twenty-one years ago, - this
  Movement, the like of which does not exist in the democratic countries, this
  Movement whose only pendant is fascism. Nation and Army, Party and State
  are today one indivisible whole. No power in the world can loosen what is
  so firmly welded together. Only fools can imagine that the year 1918 can
  be repeated.We encountered the same ideas among our plutocrats at home. They, too, always
  hoped for internal disruption, dissolution, civil war of German against German.
  Exactly the same ideas are encountered today. They say: 'There will be a
  revolution in Germany in six weeks.' They do not know who is going to make
  the revolution. There are no revolutionaries among us. Thomas Mann and others
  like him went to England. Some have already left England for America, because
  England is too close to their revolution's future field of operations. They
  are establishing their headquarters far from their future field of battle.
  Nevertheless, they assert that the revolution will come. Who will make it?
  I do not know. How it will be made, I do not know either. All I know is that
  in Germany there can be, at the most, only a few fools who might think of
  revolution, and that they are all behind iron bars.Then they said: 'Winter, General Winter is coming, and he will force Germany
  to her knees.' But, unfortunately, the German people are 'winter-proof.'
  German history has passed through I do not know how many tens of thousands
  of winters. We will get through this one, too.Then they say: 'Starvation will come.' We are prepared against this, too.
  We know the humanitarian sentiments of our British opponents and so have
  made our preparations. I believe that starvation will reach them before it
  reaches us.Then they said: 'Time is on our side.' But time is only on the side of those
  who work. No one has been harder at work than we. Of that I can assure them.
  In fact, all these vague hopes which they are building up are absolutely
  childish and ridiculous....And so, in all due modesty, I have just one more thing to say to my opponents:
  I have taken up the challenge of many democratic adversaries and up to now
  I have always emerged the victor from the conflict. I do not believe that
  this struggle is being carried on under different conditions. That is to
  say, the relation of the forces involved is exactly the same as before. In
  any case I am grateful to Providence that this struggle, having become
  inevitable, broke out in my lifetime and at a time when I still feel young
  and vigorous. Just now I am feeling particularly vigorous. Spring is coming,
  the spring which we all welcome. The season is approaching in which one can
  measure forces. I know that, although they realize the terrible hardships
  of the struggle, millions of German soldiers are at this moment thinking
  exactly the same thing....If fate should once more call us to the battlefield, the blessing of Providence
  will be with those who have merited it by years of hard work. When I compare
  myself and my opponents in other countries in the light of history, I do
  not fear the verdict on our respective mentalities. Who are these egoists?
  Each one of them merely defends the interests of his class. Behind them all
  stands either the Jew or their own moneybags. They are all nothing but
  money-grubbers, living on the profits of this war. No blessing can come of
  that. I oppose these people merely as the champion of my country. I am convinced
  that our struggle will in the future be blessed by Providence, as it has
  been blessed up to now.When I first entered this hall twenty-one years ago, I was an unknown, nameless
  soldier. I had nothing behind me but my own conviction. During the twenty-one
  years since, a new world has been created. The road leading into the future
  will be easier than the road from February 24, 1920, to the present. I look
  to the future with fanatical confidence. The whole nation has answered the
  call. I know that when the command is given: 'Forward march!' Germany will
  march.Before The Munich Court -- Speech of February 26, 1924BEFORE THE MUNICH COURTSPEECH OF FEBRUARY 26, 1924IT SEEMS strange to me that a man who, as a soldier, was for six years accustomed
  to blind obedience, should suddenly come into conflict with the State and
  its Constitution. The reasons for this stem from the days of my youth. When
  I was seventeen I came to Vienna, and there I learned to study and observe
  three important problems: the social question, the race problem, and, finally,
  the Marxist movement. I left Vienna a confirmed anti-Semite, a deadly foe
  of the whole Marxist world outlook, and pan-German in my political principles.
  And since I knew that the German destiny of German-Austria would not be fought
  out in the Austrian Army alone, but in the German and Austrian Army, I enlisted
  in the German Army....When, on November 7, [1918] it was announced that the Revolution had broken
  out in Munich, I at first could not believe it. At that time there arose
  in me the determination to devote myself to politics. I went through the
  period of the Soviets, and as a result of my opposition to them I came in
  contact with the National Socialist German Workers Movement, which at that
  time numbered six members. I was the seventh. I attached myself to this party,
  and not to one of the great political parties where my prospects would have
  been better, because none of the other parties understood or even recognized
  the decisive, fundamental problem.By Marxism I understand a doctrine which in principle rejects the idea of
  the worth of personality, which replaces individual energy by the masses
  and thereby works the destruction of our whole cultural life. This movement
  has utilized monstrously effective methods and exercised tremendous influence
  on the masses, which in the course of three or four decades could have no
  other result than that the individual has become his own brother's foe, while
  at the same time calling a Frenchman, an Englishman, or a Zulu his brother.
  This movement is distinguished by incredible terror, which is based on a
  knowledge of mass psychology....The German Revolution is a revolution, and therefore successful high treason;
  it is well known that such treason is never punished....For us it was a filthy crime against the German people, a stab in the back
  of the German nation. The middle class could not take up arms against it
  because the middle class did not understand the whole revolution. It was
  necessary to start a new struggle and to incite against the Marxist despoilers
  of the people who did not even belong to the German race - which is where
  the Marxist problem is linked with the race problem, forming one of the most
  difficult and profound questions of our time....Personally, at the beginning I held a lost position. Nevertheless, in the
  course of a few years there has grown from a little band of six men a movement
  which today embraces millions and which, above all, has once made the broad
  masses nationalistic....In 1923 came the great and bitter scandal. As early as 1922 we had seen that
  the Ruhr was about to be lost. France's aim was not merely to weaken Germany,
  to keep her from obtaining supremacy, but to break her up into small states
  so that she [France] would be able to hold the Rhine frontier. After all
  the Government's reiterations of our weakness, we knew that on top of the
  Saar and Upper Silesia we would lose our third coal region, the Ruhr; each
  loss brought on the next one....Only burning, ruthless, brutal fanaticism could have saved the situation.
  The Reich Government should have let the hundreds of thousands of young men
  who were pouring out of the Ruhr into the Reich under the old colors of
  black-white-red flow together in a mighty national wave. Instead, these young
  people were sent back home. The resistance that was organized was for wages;
  the national resistance was degraded to a paid general strike. It was forgotten
  that a foe like France cannot be prayed away, still less can he be idled
  away....Our youth has - and may this be heard in Paris - but one thought: that the
  day may come when we shall again be free. .. . . My attitude is this: I would
  rather that Germany go Bolshevist and I be hanged than that she should be
  destroyed by the French rule of the sword.... It turned out that the
  back-stabbers were stronger than ever.... With pride I admit that our men
  were the only ones to really resist in the Ruhr. We intended to hold fourteen
  meetings and introduce a propaganda campaign throughout Germany with the
  slogan: DOWN WITH THE RUHR TRAITORS!, But we were surprised by the banning
  of these mass meetings. I had met Herr von Kahr in 1920. Kahr had impressed
  me as being an honest official. I asked him why the fourteen mass meetings
  had been banned. The reason he gave me simply would not hold water. THE REAL
  REASON WAS SOMETHING THAT COULD NOT BE REVEALED. . - -From the very first day the watchword was: UNLIMITED STRUGGLE AGAINST BERLIN....The struggle against Berlin, as Dr. von Kahr would lead it, is a crime; one
  must have the courage to be logical and see that the struggle must be
  incorporated in the German national uprising. I said that all that had been
  made of this struggle was a Bavarian rejection of Berlin's requests. But
  the people expected something other than a reduction in the price of beer,
  regulation of the price of milk and confiscation of butter tubs and other
  such impossible economic proposals - proposals which make you want to ask:
  who is the genius that is advising them? Every failure could only further
  enrage the masses, and I pointed out that while the people were now only
  laughing at Kahr's measures, later on they would rise up against them. I
  said: 'Either you finish the job - and there is only the political and military
  struggle left. When you cross the Rubicon, you must march on Rome. Or else
  you do not want to struggle; then only capitulation is left....'The struggle had to turn toward the North; it could not be led by a purely
  Bavarian organization . . . I said: 'The only man to head it is Ludendorff.'I had first seen Ludendorff in 1918, in the field. In 1920 I first spoke
  personally with him. I saw that he was not only the outstanding general,
  but that he had now learned the lesson and understood what had brought the
  German nation to ruin. That Ludendorff was talked down by the others was
  one more reason for me to come closer to him. I therefore proposed Ludendorff,
  and Lossow and Seisser had no objections.I further explained to Lossow that right now nothing could be accomplished
  by petty economic measures. The fight was against Marxism. To solve this
  problem, not administrators were needed but firebrands who would be in a
  position to inflame the national spirit to the extreme. Kahr could not do
  that, I pointed out; the youth were not behind him. I declared that I could
  join them only on the condition that the political struggle was put into
  my hands alone. This was not impudence or immodesty; I believe that when
  a man knows he can do a job, he must not be modest....One thing was certain: Lossow, Kahr, and Seisser had the same goal that we
  had: to get rid of the Reich Government with its present international and
  parliamentary position, and to replace it by an anti-parliamentary government.
  If our undertaking was actually high treason, then during this whole period
  Lossow, Seisser, and Kahr must have been committing high treason along with
  us - for during all those months we talked of nothing but the aims of which
  we now stand accused....How could we have called for a new government if we had not known that the
  gentlemen in power were altogether on our side? How else could we, two days
  before, have given such orders as: at 8:30 o'clock such and such a government
  will be proclaimed....Lossow talked of a coup d'etat. Kahr quite openly declared that he would
  give the word to strike. The only possible interpretation of this talk is
  that these men wanted to strike, but each time lost their nerve. Our last
  conversation, on November 6, was for me the absolute confirmation of my belief
  that these men wanted to, but - !....Berlin, Zeughaus -- Speech of March 16, 1941BERLIN, ZEUGHAUSSPEECH OF MARCH 16, 1941FOR the second time we enter this room for a memorial service to our people.
  For more than a year we have appreciated how inadequate are words to express
  the nation's thankfulness to its heroes. In times of long peace the memory
  of the terrible experiences of war, out of which rises heroism, gradually
  grows dim. It even happens that a whole generation knows nothing of war as
  such and honors its heroes without being in the least worthy of them.In such a circumstance the greatest sacrifice of man is acknowledged with
  superficial phrases. There is even danger that, while remembering heroes
  of times past, the men of the present regard themselves as free of the obligation
  to conduct themselves with a similar spirit of heroism.But if the German people in the year 1941 honors its heroes, it does so at
  a time and under circumstances that give it a right to hold up its head with
  pride as it pays tribute to men of the near and distant past who sacrificed
  their lives for the State.As twelve months ago in this consecrated hall we turned our thoughts to our
  heroes, there lay behind us the thoroughly successful beginning of a war
  that Germany did not want, but that was forced on us by the same forces that
  were responsible before in history for the great war of the peoples in 1914
  to 1918.They were the elements whose goal that time was to rob the German nation
  of the most primitive right of life, who in the years of the Versailles Dictate
  raised as the dogma of the new world order political enslavement and economic
  impotence, and now are opposed to the revival of our people with the same
  hatred with which they once pursued the Second Reich.In complete misjudgment of the situation, in a sadly false estimate of their
  own and Germany's power, and in complete ignorance of the will and determination
  of the new German leadership, they expected a second crushing of our people
  would be as easy as the first attempt.The fact that the American General Wood, before the investigation committee
  of the American Senate, testified that as early as 1936 Churchill told him
  Germany was getting too strong again and must be destroyed in a new war
  established firmly in history the real responsibility for present developments.England and France alone wanted war - not so much the people as a thin stratum
  of political and financial leadership behind which, wielding its last power,
  stood international Jewry and its world conspiracies of democracy and
  Freemasonry.But it was the hope of these responsible warmakers that thrust Poland forward
  not only to attain outward justification for war but also to make sure in
  advance that Poland would play its World War role of dividing German strength.The eighteen-day campaign in Poland was but the precipitous end of these
  hopes. Under these circumstances the German people were able to enter the
  year 1940 with proud confidence. But our people did not deceive themselves
  as to the year lying ahead. The battle in the West, which remains in the
  memory of every living German World War soldier as an episode of suffering
  without end, had to be decided.In exact knowledge of our preparations and plans, in boundless confidence
  in the German soldier, his armament and leadership and ability and before
  all in his attitude, I dared on Memorial Day, 1940, to predict that the battle
  before us would end in the most glorious victory in our history. Eight weeks
  later this battle started.But before the defense forces struck in the West, what was probably the most
  important decision of the war was taken. On April 9, with just a few hours
  to spare, a dangerous British attempt to strike German defense powers in
  the heart from the north was anticipated. At dawn on May 10 this perhaps
  most dangerous threat to our military and political position had been swept
  aside. So the battle to a decision in the West could begin. It followed a
  course previously mapped out.What could not be done in four years of indescribable sacrifice in the World
  War was accomplished in a few weeks: the crushing of the British-French front.Despite the conclusion of the guilty British Prime Minister of that time,
  the year 1940 will go down in history as one of the most decisive and
  significant, because in this year there was a shift of power of truly historic
  importance. If in the year 1918 we could have had only a portion of this
  success the World War would have been won.Today German forces stand throughout the world, men and material strengthened
  to an inconceivable degree, ready to complete joyfully and confidently what
  was begun in the epochal year 1940....The German people have recovered everything that once was sacrificed in a
  foolish delusion. So today we can recall with lightened hearts the sacrifice
  of life in the World War. But in the illustrious events of the present we
  must not overlook the vast spiritual powers for which the German people and
  its soldiers must thank the heroism of their ancestors.The soldiers of the World War did not fall in vain. If at that time the sacrifice
  was not immediately crowned by success, their heroic conduct left a heritage
  that an ever worthy German generation will prize with deepest emotion and
  that paralyzes the memories of our enemies.It is perhaps this consciousness of strength that enabled the German people
  today to achieve such greatness. The people feel they are carrying out the
  will of heroic ancestors.Beside the dead of the World War lie now the fallen in continuation of this
  battle. And again, as then, the sons of our people lie in distant places,
  in the sea, everywhere as courageous fighters for their great German home.
  It is the same German man - be it in World War work or in the present fight
  that has been thrust upon us - who risks and gives his life to win for his
  people a greater future, a surer peace, a better organization and human
  comradeship than that given us by the dictators of Versailles.But we think also of the Italian soldiers, who as allies also must give up
  their lives in distant parts of the world. Their ideals and objectives are
  the same as ours: The world is not here for a few people, and an order based
  eternally on the distinction between the haves and the have-nots does not
  exist any more because the have-nots have determined to lay claim to their
  portion of God's earth.The home front, too, in this war must make a greater sacrifice than formerly.
  The heroism of the home front contributes its bit to the most decisive battle
  in German history. And here it is not only the man who must show the power
  of his resistance but the woman, too. The nation has become a battling unity.
  And not because they sought this fight but because it was forced on them.Behind us lies a winter of work. What remained to be improved has been done.
  The German Army is now the strongest military instrument in our history.
  In the months of this winter our allies bore the brunt of the whole power
  of the British attack, but from now on German forces again will resume their
  share of this load.No power and no support coming from any part of the world can change the
  outcome of this battle in any respect. England will fall. The everlasting
  providence will not give victory to him who, merely with the object of ruling
  through his gold, is willing to spill the blood of men.Germany demanded nothing of England and France. All the Reich's denunciations,
  its disarmament and peace suggestions, were vain. International finance and
  plutocracy want to fight this war to the finish. So the end of this war will
  and must be their destruction. Then may providence find a way to lead their
  people, from whom the chains will be struck, into a better order!When England and France declared this war, England immediately began a fight
  against civil life. To the blockade of the World War, that war against women
  and children, it added this time air and fire war against peaceful villages
  and cities. In both of these modes of war England will be defeated. The air
  war that Churchill started will destroy not Germany but England itself. Just
  so, the blockade will not strike Germany but its inventor.While the coming of winter limited battle actions on land, the fight in the
  air and on the sea continued. The heroism of submarine and ship crews goes
  hand in hand with that of our fliers....So we enter the year 1941, cool and determined to end what started the year
  before. It is quite immaterial what part of the earth or in which sea or
  in what air space our German soldiers fight. They will know they battle for
  fate and freedom and the future of our people forever.But while we end this battle victoriously we thank our heroes of the past,
  for we are saving that for which they fell: Germany, our people, and its
  great German Empire.Berlin, Reichstag -- Speech of March 23, 1933BERLIN, REICHSTAGSPEECH OF MARCH 23, 1933IN NOVEMBER, 1918, Marxist organizations seized the executive power by means
  of a revolution. The monarchs were dethroned, the authorities of the Reich
  and of the States removed from office, and thereby a breach of the Constitution
  was committed. The success of the revolution in a material sense protected
  the guilty parties from the hands of the law. They sought to justify it morally
  by asserting that Germany or its Government bore the guilt for the outbreak
  of the War.This assertion was deliberately and actually untrue. In consequence, however,
  these untrue accusations in the interest of our former enemies led to the
  severest oppression of the entire German nation and to the breach of the
  assurances given to us in Wilson's fourteen points, and so for Germany, that
  is to say the working classes of the German people, to a time of infinite
  misfortune....The splitting up of the nation into groups with irreconcilable views,
  systematically brought about by the false doctrines of Marxism, means the
  destruction of the basis of a possible communal life.... It is only the creation
  of a real national community, rising above the interests and differences
  of rank and class, that can permanently remove the source of nourishment
  of these aberrations of the human mind. The establishment of such a solidarity
  of views in the German body corporate is all the more important, for it is
  only thereby that the possibility is provided of maintaining friendly relations
  with foreign Powers without regard to the tendencies or general principles
  by which they are dominated, for the elimination of communism in Germany
  is a purely domestic German affair.Simultaneously with this political purification of our public life, the
  Government of the Reich will undertake a thorough moral purging of the body
  corporate of the nation. The entire educational system, the theater, the
  cinema, literature, the Press, and the wireless - all these will be used
  as means to this end and valued accordingly. They must all serve for the
  maintenance of the eternal values present in the essential character of our
  people. Art will always remain the expression and the reflection of the longings
  and the realities of an era. The neutral international attitude of aloofness
  is rapidly disappearing. Heroism is coming forward passionately and will
  in future shape and lead political destiny. It is the task of art to be the
  expression of this determining spirit of the age. Blood and race will once
  more become the source of artistic intuition....Our legal institutions must serve above all for the maintenance of this national
  community. The irremovableness of the judges must ensure a sense of
  responsibility and the exercise of discretion in their judgments in the interests
  of society. Not the individual but the nation as a whole alone can be the
  center of legislative solicitude. High treason and treachery to the nation
  will be ruthlessly eradicated in the future. The foundations of the existence
  of justice cannot be other than the foundations of the existence of the nation.The Government, being resolved to undertake the political and moral purification
  of our public life, is creating and securing the conditions necessary for
  a really profound revival of religious life.The advantages of a personal and political nature that might arise from
  compromising with atheistic organizations would not outweigh the consequences
  which would become apparent in the destruction of general moral basic values.
  The national Government regards the two Christian confessions as the weightiest
  factors for the maintenance of our nationality. It will respect the agreements
  concluded between it and the federal States. Their rights are not to be
  infringed. But the Government hopes and expects that the work on the national
  and moral regeneration of our nation which it has made its task will, on
  the other hand, be treated with the same respect....Great are the tasks of the national Government in the sphere of economic
  life.Here all action must be governed by one law: the people does not live for
  business, and business does not exist for capital; but capital serves business,
  and business serves the people. In principle, the Government will not protect
  the economic interests of the German people by the circuitous method of an
  economic bureaucracy to be organized by the State, but by the utmost furtherance
  of private initiative and by the recognition of the rights of property....The Government will systematically avoid currency experiments. We are faced
  above all by two economic tasks of the first magnitude. The salvation of
  the German farmer must be achieved at all costs....Furthermore, it is perfectly clear to the national Government that the final
  removal of the distress both in agricultural business and in that of the
  towns depends on the absorption of the army of the unemployed in the process
  of production. This constitutes the second of the great economic tasks. It
  can only be solved by a general appeasement, in applying sound natural economic
  principles and all measures necessary, even if, at the time, they cannot
  reckon with any degree of popularity. The providing of work and the compulsory
  labor service are, in this connection, only individual measures within the
  scope of the entire action proposed....We are aware that the geographic position of Germany, with her lack of raw
  materials, does not fully permit of economic self-sufficiency for the Reich.
  It cannot be too often emphasized that nothing is further from the thoughts
  of the Government of the Reich than hostility to exporting. We are fully
  aware that we have need of the connection with the outside world, and that
  the marketing of German commodities in the world provides a livelihood for
  many millions of our fellow-countrymen.We also know what are the conditions necessary for a sound exchange of services
  between the nations of the world. For Germany has been compelled for years
  to perform services without receiving an equivalent, with the result that
  the task of maintaining Germany as an active partner in the exchange of
  commodities is not so much one of commercial as of financial policy. So long
  as we are not accorded a reasonable settlement of our foreign debts corresponding
  to our economic capacity, we are unfortunately compelled to maintain our
  foreign-exchange control. The Government of the Reich is, for that reason,
  also compelled to maintain the restrictions on the efflux of capital across
  the frontiers of Germany....The protection of the frontiers of the Reich and thereby of the lives of
  our people and the existence of our business is now in the hands of the
  Reichswehr, which, in accordance with the terms imposed upon us by the Treaty
  of Versailles, is to be regarded as the only really disarmed army in the
  world. In spite of its enforced smallness and entirely insufficient armament,
  the German people may regard their Reichswehr with proud satisfaction. This
  little instrument of our national self-defence has come into being under
  the most difficult conditions. The spirit imbuing it is that of our best
  military traditions. The German nation has thus fulfilled with painful
  conscientiousness the obligations imposed upon it by the Peace Treaty, indeed,
  even the replacement of ships for our fleet then sanctioned has, I may perhaps
  be allowed to say, unfortunately, only been carried out to a small extent.For years Germany has been waiting in vain for the fulfillment of the promise
  of disarmament made to her by the others. It is the sincere desire of the
  national Government to be able to refrain from increasing our army and our
  weapons, insofar as the rest of the world is now also ready to fulfill its
  obligations in the matter of radical disarmament. For Germany desires nothing
  except an equal right to live and equal freedom.In any case the national Government will educate the German people in this
  spirit of a desire for freedom. The national honor, the honor of our army
  and the ideal of freedom must once more become sacred to the German people!The German nation wishes to live in peace with the rest of the world. But
  it is for this very reason that the Government of the Reich will employ every
  means to obtain the final removal of the division of the nations of the world
  into two categories. The keeping open of this wound leads to distrust on
  the one side and hatred on the other, and thus to a general feeling of
  insecurity. The national Government is ready to extend a hand in sincere
  understanding to every nation that is ready finally to make an end of the
  tragic past. The international economic distress can only disappear when
  the basis has been provided by stable political relations and when the nations
  have regained confidence in each other.For the overcoming of the economic catastrophe three things are necessary:Absolutely authoritative leadership in internal affairs, in order to create
      confidence in the stability of conditions.The securing of peace by the great nations for a long time to come, with
      a view to restoring the confidence of the nations in each other.The final victory of the principles of common sense in the organization and
      conduct of business, and also a general release from reparations and impossible
      liabilities for debts and interest.We are unfortunately faced by the fact that the Geneva Conference, in spite
  of lengthy negotiations, has so far reached no practical result. The decision
  regarding the securing of a real measure of disarmament has been constantly
  delayed by the raising of questions of technical detail and by the introduction
  of problems that have nothing to do with disarmament. This procedure is useless.The illegal state of one-sided disarmament and the resulting national insecurity
  of Germany cannot continue any longer.We recognize it as a sign of the feeling of responsibility and of the good
  will of the British Government that they have endeavored, by means of their
  disarmament proposal, to cause the Conference finally to arrive at speedy
  decisions. The Government of the Reich will support every endeavor aimed
  at really carrying out general disarmament and securing the fulfillment of
  Germany's long-overdue claim for disarmament. For fourteen years we have
  been disarmed, and for fourteen months we have been waiting for the results
  of the Disarmament Conference. Even more far-reaching is the plan of the
  head of the Italian Government, which makes a broad-minded and far-seeing
  attempt to secure a peaceful and consistent development of the whole of European
  policy. We attach the greatest weight to this plan, and we are ready to
  co-operate with absolute sincerity on the basis it provides, in order to
  unite the four Great Powers, England, France, Italy, and Germany, in friendly
  co-operation in attacking with courage and determination the problems upon
  the solution of which the fate of Europe depends.It is for this reason that we are particularly grateful for the appreciative
  heartiness with which the national renaissance of Germany has been greeted
  in Italy....In the same way, the Government of the Reich, which regards Christianity
  as the unshakable foundation of the morals and moral code of the nation,
  attaches the greatest value to friendly relations with the Holy See, and
  is endeavoring to develop them. We feel sympathy for our brother nation in
  Austria in its trouble and distress. In all their doings the Government of
  the Reich is conscious of the connection between the destiny of all German
  races. Their attitude toward the other foreign Powers may be gathered from
  what has already been said. But even in cases where our mutual relations
  are encumbered with difficulties, we shall endeavor to arrive at a settlement.
  But in any case the basis for an understanding can never be the distinction
  between victor and vanquished.We are convinced that such a settlement is possible in our relations with
  France, if the Governments will attack the problems affecting them on both
  sides in a really broadminded way. The Government of the Reich is ready to
  cultivate with the Soviet Union friendly relations profitable to both parties.
  It is above all the Government of the National Revolution which feels itself
  in a position to adopt such a positive policy with regard to Soviet Russia.
  The fight against communism in Germany is our internal affair in which we
  will never permit interference from outside....We have particularly at heart the fate of the Germans living beyond the frontiers
  of Germany who are allied with us in speech, culture, and customs and have
  to make a hard fight to retain these values. The national Government is resolved
  to use all the means at its disposal to support the rights internationally
  guaranteed to the German minorities.We welcome the plan for a World Economic Conference and approve of its meeting
  at an early date. The Government of the Reich is ready to take part in this
  Conference, in order to arrive at positive results at last. . . .Before The Munich Court -- Speech of March 27, 1924BEFORE THE MUNICH COURTSPEECH OF MARCH 27, 1924WHEN did the ruin of Germany begin? You know the watchword of the old German
  system in its foreign policy: it ran - maintenance of world peace, economic
  conquest of the world. With both these principles one cannot govern a people.
  The maintenance of world peace cannot be the purpose and aim of the policy
  of a State. The increase and maintenance of a people - that alone can be
  the aim. If you are going to conquer the world by an economic policy, other
  peoples will not fail to see their danger.What is the State? Today the State is an economic organization, an association
  of persons, formed, it would seem, for the sole purpose that all should co
  operate in securing each other's daily bread. THE STATE, HOWEVER, IS NOT
  AN ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION, IT IS A 'VOLKIC' ORGANISM. The purpose, the aim
  of the State is to provide the people with its food-supply and with the position
  of power in the world which is its due. Germany occupies in Europe perhaps
  the most bitter situation of any people, Militarily, politically, and
  geographically it is surrounded by none but rivals: IT CAN MAINTAIN ITSELF
  ONLY WHEN IT PLACES A POWER-POLICY (MACHTPOLITIK) RUTHLESSLY IN THE FOREGROUND.Two Powers are in a position to determine the future development of Europe:
  England and France. England's aim remains eternally the same: to balkanize
  Europe and to establish a balance of power in Europe so that her position
  in the world will not be threatened. ENGLAND IS NOT ON PRINCIPLE AN ENEMY
  OF GERMANY, IT IS THE POWER WHICH SEEKS TO GAIN THE FIRST PLACE IN EUROPE.
  The declared enemy of Germany is France. Just as England needs the balkanization
  of Europe, so France needs the balkanization of Germany in order to gain
  hegemony in Europe. After four and a half years of bitter struggle at last
  through the Revolution the scale of victory turned in favor of the coalition
  of these two Powers, with the following result: France was faced with the
  question: Was she to realize her eternal war-aim or not? That means: Could
  France destroy Germany and deprive it of all the sources whereby its people
  was fed? Today France watches the ripening to fulfillment of her age-old
  plan: it matters not what Government will be at the helm in France: the supreme
  aim will remain - the annihilation of Germany, the extermination of twenty
  million Germans, and the dissolution of Germany into separate States....The army which we have formed grows from day to day; from hour to hour it
  grows more rapidly. EVEN NOW I HAVE THE PROUD HOPE THAT ONE DAY THE HOUR
  IS COMING WHEN THESE UNTRAINED BANDS WILL BECOME BATTALIONS, WHEN THE BATTALIONS
  WILL BECOME REGIMENTS AND THE REGIMENTS DIVISIONS, when the old cockade will
  be raised from the mire, when the old banners will once again wave before
  us: and then reconciliation will come in that eternal last Court of Judgment
  - the Court of God - before which we are ready to take our stand. Then from
  our bones, from our graves will sound the voice of that tribunal which alone
  has the right to sit in judgment upon us. For, gentlemen, it is not you who
  pronounce judgment upon us, it is the eternal Court of History which will
  make its pronouncement upon the charge which is brought against us. The judgment
  that you will pass, that I know. But that Court will not ask of us: 'Have
  you committed high treason or not?' That Court will judge us ....who as Germans
  have wished the best for their people and their Fatherland, who wished to
  fight and to die. You may declare us guilty a thousand times, but the Goddess
  who presides over the Eternal Court of History will with a smile tear in
  pieces the charge of the Public Prosecutor and the judgment of the Court:
  for she declares us guiltless.Wilhelmshaven -- Speech of April 1, 1939WILHELMSHAVENSPEECH OF APRIL 1, 1939German Fellow-Citizens:- He who wants to have the deepest impression of the
  decay and resurrection of Germany most vividly must go and see the development
  of a city like Wilhelmshaven, which today reverberates with life and activity
  and which still a short time ago was a dead spot nearly without means of
  existence and without prospects of a future - it pays to revisualize this
  past.When this city experienced its first upward move it coincided with the rise
  of the German Reich after its unification. This Germany was in a state of
  peace.During the same time as the so-called peace-loving and Puritan nations led
  a great number of wars, Germany then knew only one aim: To maintain peace,
  to work in peace, to raise the prosperity of its inhabitants, and thereby
  to contribute to human culture and civilization.This Germany of peace times has attempted, with unending diligence, with
  geniality, and with steadiness, to form its life within and to safeguard
  outwardly - through participation in peaceful competition with the nations
  - its due place in the sun.Even though this Germany through the decades was the safest guarantor of
  peace, and even though she occupied herself with peaceful things, she was
  unable to prevent other nations, and especially their statesmen, from following
  this rise with envy and hatred and finally to answer with a war.Today we know from the documents of history how the encirclement policy of
  those times was carried on in a planned way by England.We know from numerous findings and publications that in that country the
  conception was that it would be necessary to bring down Germany militarily
  because its destruction would insure every British citizen a greater abundance
  of life's possessions.Certainly at that time Germany made mistakes. Its most serious mistake was
  to see this encirclement and not to stave it off in time.The only fault we can blame the regime of that time for is that the Reich
  had full knowledge of this devilish plan of a raid and yet it did not have
  the power of decision to ward it off in time and could only let this encirclement
  ripen until the beginning of the catastrophe.The result was the World War. In this war the German people, although it
  had by no means the best armaments, fought heroically. No people can claim
  the glory for itself to have forced us down - much less so that nation whose
  statesmen today speak the greatest words.Germany at that time remained undefeated and unconquered on land, at sea,
  and in the air - however, it was Germany.But there was the power of the lie and the poison of propaganda which did
  not balk at misinterpretation and untruth.This Germany faced the world in absolute defenselessness because it was
  unprepared.When [President Woodrow] Wilson's Fourteen Points were published, not only
  many German fellow-citizens but above all the 'leading' men saw in these
  Fourteen Points not only the possibility of ending the World War but also
  the pacification of the world at large.A peace of reconciliation and understanding was promised-a peace that was
  to know neither victor nor vanquished, a peace of equal justice for all,
  a peace of equal distribution of colonial domains and equal recognition of
  colonial desires, a peace that was to be finally crowned by a league of all
  free nations.It was to be a guarantor of equal rights that would make it seem superfluous
  in the future for peoples to bear the armaments that previously, so it was
  said, were so heavily burdensome.Therefore, disarmament-disarmament of all the nations.Germany was to go ahead as a good example. Everybody was obliged to follow
  this disarmament. Also the age of secret diplomacy was to be ended. All problems
  henceforth were to be discussed openly and freely.First of all, however, the right of self-determination of nations finally
  was to have been settled and raised to its proper importance.Germany believed in these assurances. With faith in these declarations it
  had dropped its weapons. And then a breach of a pledge began such as world
  history had never seen before.When our nation had dropped its weapons, a period of suppression, blackmailing,
  plundering, and slavery began. Not another word about peace without victor
  or vanquished, but an endless sentence of condemnation for the vanquished.
  Not another word about justice, but of justice on your side and injustice
  and illegality on the other.Robbery upon robbery, oppression upon oppression were the consequences.No one in this democratic world bothered himself any more about the sufferings
  of our people. Hundreds of thousands fell in the war, not from enemy weapons,
  but from the hunger blockade. And after the war ended, this blockade was
  continued for months in order to oppress our people still more.Even German war prisoners, after an endless time, had to remain in captivity.
  The German colonies were stolen from us, German foreign holdings were simply
  seized and our merchant marine taken away.Added to that was a financial plundering such as the world had never before
  seen. The monetary penalties which were imposed on the German people reached
  astronomical figures.Of these an English statesman said that they could only be fulfilled when
  the German standard of living was reduced to the lowest possible level and
  Germans worked fourteen hours daily. What German spirit, German alertness,
  and German labor through decades and decades had collected and saved was
  lost in a few years.Millions of Germans were either torn away from the Reich or were prevented
  from returning to the Reich. The League of Nations was not an instrument
  of a just policy of understanding among nations, but is and was a guarantee
  of the meanest dictation man ever invented.So was a great people raped and led toward a misery that you all know. A
  great people through a broken pledge was cheated of its rights and its existence
  rendered practically impossible. A French statesman coined the following
  expression: 'There are 20,000,000 Germans too many in the world!'Germans ended their lives out of despair, others slid into lethargy and an
  inevitable destiny and still others were of the opinion that everything must
  be destroyed; still others set their teeth and clenched their fists in
  unconscious rage. Still others believed that the past should be restored
  - restored just as it was.Everyone had an idea of some sort. And I, as an unknown soldier of the World
  War, drew my conclusions.It was a very short and simple program. It ran: Removal of the internal enemies
  of the nation, termination of the divisions within Germany, the gathering
  up of the entire national strength of our people into a new community, and
  the breaking of the peace treaty - in one way or another!For as long as this dictate of Versailles weighed upon the German people
  it was actually damned to go to the ground. If, however, other statesmen
  now declare that right must rule on this earth, then they should be told
  that their crime is no right, that their dictate is neither right nor law
  but above this dictate stand the eternal rights of peoples to live.The German people were not created by providence in order to follow obediently
  a law which suits the English or the French, but rather in order to champion
  their right to live. That is why we are here! I was determined to take up
  this battle of advocating the German right to live.I took it up first within the nation.In place of a great number of parties, social ranks, and societies, a single
  community now has taken its place - the German national community! To bring
  it to realization and to deepen it more and more is our task.I had to hurt many in this time. However, I believe that the good fortune
  in which the entire nation is participating today must richly compensate
  every single one for what he had to give up dearly on his own part.You all have sacrificed your parties, societies, and associations, but you
  have obtained in return a great strong Reich. And the Reich today, thank
  God, is strong enough to take your rights under its protection.We no longer are dependent on the good graces or disgraces of other States
  or their statesmen.When, more than six years ago, I obtained power, I took over a wretched
  inheritance. The Reich seemed to possess no more possibilities of existence
  for its citizens.I undertook the work at that time with the one single capital which I possessed.
  It was the capital of your strength to work.Your strength to work, my fellow-citizens, I now have begun to put to use.
  I had no foreign exchange. I had no gold reserve. I had only one thing -
  my faith and your work!Thus we began the gigantic work of rebuilding based upon the confidence of
  the nation, instilled with the belief and the confidence in its eternal values.Now we have found a new economic system, a system which is this: Capital
  is the power of labor and the coverage of money lies in our production.We have founded a system based on the most sincere foundation there is, namely:
  Form your life yourself! Work for your existence! Help yourself and God will
  help you!Within a few years we have wrenched Germany from despair. But the world did
  not help us. If today an English statesman says one can and must solve all
  problems through frank deliberations, I should like to tell this statesman
  just this: An opportunity has been open for fifteen years before our time.If the world says today that the nations must be divided into virtuous nations
  and into such as are not virtuous - and that the English and French belong
  to the first class, and the Germans and Italians belong to those not virtuous
  - we can only answer: The judgment whether a people is virtuous or not virtuous
  can hardly be passed by a human being. That should be left to God.Perhaps the same British statesman will retort: 'God has passed the verdict
  already, because He presented the virtuous nations with one quarter of the
  world and He took everything away from the nonvirtuous!'The question may be permitted: 'By what means have the virtuous nations obtained
  for themselves this quarter of the world.'And one must answer: 'They did not apply virtuous methods!'For 300 years this England acted without virtue in order now in maturity
  to speak of virtue. Thus it could appear that during this British period
  without virtue 46,000,000 Englishmen have subdued nearly one-quarter of the
  world while 80,000,000 Germans, because of their virtue, must live at a rate
  of 140 to one square kilometer.Indeed, twenty years ago, the question of virtue still was not entirely clear
  for the British statesmen insofar as it concerned conceptions of property.
  One still held it compatible with virtue simply to take away the colonies
  of another people that had acquired them through treaty or through purchase
  because one possessed the power - this very power which now, to be sure,
  should be deemed as something abominable and detestable.I have only one thing to ask the gentlemen here: whether they believe what
  they say or do not believe it. We do not know.We assume, however, that they do not believe what they say. For if we should
  assume that they themselves really believe it then we would lose every respect
  for them.For fifteen years Germany patiently bore its lot and fate. I also sought
  in the beginning to solve every problem through talks. I made an offer in
  the case of each problem and each time it was turned down!There can be no doubt that every people possesses sacred interests, simply
  because they are identical with their lives and their right to live.When, today, a British statesman demands that every problem which lies in
  the midst of Germany's life interest first should be discussed with England,.
  then I, too, could demand just as well that every British problem first is
  to be discussed with us.Certainly, these Englishmen may give me the answer: 'The Germans have no
  business in Palestine!' I answer that we do not want anything in Palestine.Just as we Germans have little to do in Palestine, just as little business
  has England mixing in our German section of existence. And if they now declare
  that it involves general questions of law and justice I could approve of
  this opinion only if it was considered as binding to both of us.They say we have no right to do this or that. I should like to raise the
  counter-question: What right, for example, has England to shoot down Arabs
  in Palestine just because they defend their homeland; who gives them this
  right?Anyway, we have not slaughtered thousands in Central Europe but instead we
  have regulated our problems with law and order.However, I should like to say one thing here: The German people of today,
  the German Reich of today is not willing to surrender life interests, it
  also is not willing to face rising dangers without doing something about
  them.When the Allies, without regard or purpose, right, tradition, or even
  reasonableness, changed the map of Europe, we had not the power to prevent
  it. If, however, they expect the Germany of today to sit patiently by until
  the very last day when this same result would again be repeated - while they
  create satellite States and set them against Germany - then they are mistaking
  the Germany of today for the Germany of before the war.He who declares himself ready to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for these
  powers must realize he burns his fingers.Really, we feel no hatred against the Czech people. We have lived together
  for years. The English statesmen do not know this. They have no idea that
  Hradcany castle was not built by an Englishman but by a German and that the
  St. Vitus Cathedral likewise was not erected by Englishmen but that German
  hands did it.Even the French were not active there. They do not know that already at a
  time when England still was very small a German Kaiser was paid homage on
  this hill [Hradcany castle]-that one thousand years before me the first German
  King stood there and accepted the homage of this people.Englishmen do not know that. They could not know that and they do not have
  to know it. It is sufficient that we know it and that it is true that this
  territory lay in the living space of the German people for over a thousand
  years.Despite this, however, we would have had nothing against an independent Czech
  State if, first, it had not suppressed Germans, and, second, if it had not
  been intended as the instrument of a future attack on Germany. When, however,
  a former French Air Minister writes in a newspaper that on the basis of their
  prominent position it is the task of these Czechs to strike at the heart
  of German industry with air attacks during war, then one understands that
  this is not without interest to us and that we draw certain conclusions from
  it.It would have been up to England and France to defend this airbase. Upon
  us fell the task of preventing such an attack at all events. I sought to
  accomplish this by a natural and simple way.When I first saw that every effort of that kind was destined to be wrecked
  and that elements hostile to Germany again would win the upper hand, and
  as I further saw that this State had long since lost its inner vitality -
  indeed, that it already was broken to pieces - I again carried through the
  old German Reich. And I joined together again what had to be united because
  of history and geographical positions, and according to all rules of reason.Not to oppress the Czech people! It will enjoy more freedom than the suppressed
  people of the virtuous nations.I have, so I believe, thereby rendered peace a great service, because I have
  rendered innocuous in time an instrument which was destined to become effective
  in war against Germany. If they now say that this is the signal that Germany
  now wants to attack the entire world, I do not believe that this is meant
  seriously: such could only be the expression of a bad conscience.Perhaps it is rage over the failure of a far-flung plan, perhaps it is an
  attempt to create tactical preconditions for a new policy of encirclement.Be that as it may: it is my conviction that thereby I have rendered peace
  a great service and out of this conviction I decided three weeks ago to name
  the coming party rally the 'Party Convention of Peace.'For Germany has no intention of attacking other people. What we, however,
  do not want to renounce is the building up of our economic relations. We
  have a right thereto and I do not accept any condition from a European or
  a non-European statesman.The German Reich is not only a great producer but also a gigantic consumer,
  just as we as a producer will be an irreplaceable trade partner, so as a
  consumer we are capable of honorably and fairly paying for what we consume.We are not thinking about making war on other peoples. However, our precondition
  is that they leave us in peace.In any case the German Reich is not ready everlastingly to accept intimidation
  or even a policy of encirclement.I once made an agreement with England - namely, the Naval Treaty. It is based
  on the earnest desire which we all possess never to have to go to war against
  England. But this wish can only be a mutual one.If this wish no longer exists in England, then the practical preconditions
  for this agreement therewith are removed and Germany also would accept this
  very calmly. We are self-assured because we are strong, and we are strong
  because we are united and because in addition we are looking forward. And
  in this city, my fellow citizens, I can address the one exhortation to you:
  Look into the world and to all its happenings with open eyes. Do not deceive
  yourselves about the most important precondition in life - namely, the necessity
  to be strong.We have experienced this for fifteen years. Therefore I have made Germany
  strong again and erected an armed force, an army on land, at sea, and in
  the air.When they say in other countries that they will arm and will keep arming
  still more, I can tell those statesmen only this: They will not be able to
  tire me out. I am determined to proceed on this road and I have a conviction
  that we shall proceed faster than the others. No power on earth will ever
  again be able to entice the weapons from us through any phrase.Should, however, somebody be craving for measuring their strength with ours,
  then the German people also are ready at any time and I am ready and determined.Just as we think, our friends also think, especially the State with which
  we are bound most closely and with which we are marching now and will march
  under all circumstances forever.If hostile journalists do not know of anything else to write, then they write
  about rents or breaks in the Axis. They ought to hold their peace. This Axis
  is the most natural political instrument existing in this world.It is a political combination which owes its origin not only to reasonable
  political deliberation and the desire for justice but also to the power of
  an ideal.This construction will be more durable than the momentary ties of nonhomogeneous
  bodies on the other side. For if some one tells me today that there are no
  philosophical or ideological differences of any kind between England and
  Soviet Russia, then I can only say:'I congratulate you, gentlemen!'I believe that the time is not far distant in which the philosophical community
  between Fascist Italy and National Socialist Germany will prove essentially
  different than the one between democratic Great Britain and the bolshevist
  Russia of Stalin.However, if there really should be no ideological difference, then I can
  only say: How correct, indeed, is my position toward Marxism and communism
  and democracy! Why two phenomena if they possess the same contents?In these days we experience a very great triumph and a deep inner satisfaction.
  A country which also was devastated by bolshevism, where hundreds of thousands
  of human beings, women, men, children, and patriarchs have been slaughtered,
  has liberated itself, liberated despite all the ideological friends of bolshevism
  who sit in Great Britain, France and in other countries.We can understand this Spain only too well in its struggle and we greet and
  congratulate it for its success. We Germans of today can express this with
  special pride, since many German young men have done their duty there. They
  have helped as volunteers to break a tyrannic regime and to return to a nation
  the right of self-determination.We are pleased to note how fast, how extremely fast, the philosophical change
  came over the deliverers of war material on the Red side. We note how much
  they now, all of a sudden, understand this National Spain and how ready they
  are to conduct with this National Spain, if not philosophical, then at least
  economic business.This also is a sign showing the trend of development.My fellow-citizens, I believe that all States will be facing the same problem
  which we have faced.State after State will either fall under the Jewish bolshevist pest or it
  will defend itself.We have done it and have now erected a national German people's State. This
  people's State wants to live in peace and friendship with any other State
  but it will never again let itself be forced down by another State.I do not know whether the world will become fascist! But I am deeply convinced
  that this world in the end will defend itself against the most severe
  bolshevistic threat that exists.Therefore I believe that a final understanding between nations will come
  sooner or later. Only when this Jewish wedge among peoples is removed can
  the establishment of co-operation among nations - built on lasting understanding
  - be considered.Today we must rely upon our own strength! And we can be satisfied with the
  results of this trust in ourselves - inwardly and outwardly.When I came to power, my fellow-citizens, Germany was divided and impotent
  internally, and outwardly the sport of foreign designs. Today we are in order
  domestically. Our business is flourishing.Abroad perhaps we are not loved, but respected. Yet we receive attention!
  That is the decisive factor! Above all we have given the greatest possible
  good fortune to millions of our fellow-citizens - the return into our Greater
  German Reich.Second: We have given Central Europe a great piece of good fortune, namely,
  peace - peace that will be protected by German might. And this might can
  no longer be broken by any world power. That is our pledge!So we will show that over two million citizens did not fall in the Great
  War in vain. From their sacrifice came Greater Germany. From their sacrifice
  was this strong young German people that the Reich called into being and
  that has now made itself felt. In the face of this sacrifice we shall not
  shy away from any sacrifice if it is ever necessary.Let the world understand that!It can make pacts and draw up declarations as much as it wishes. I have no
  faith in paper, but I do have faith in you, my fellow-citizens!The greatest breach of faith of all time was committed against us Germans.
  Let us take care that our people internally are never again in a position
  to be broken. Then no one in the world will threaten us. Then peace will
  either be maintained for our people or, if necessary, peace will be enforced.Then our people will bloom and flourish. Our people will be able to put their
  geniality, their ability, their diligence and steadfastness into the works
  of peace and human culture. This is our desire. We hope for it and we believe
  in it.Twenty years ago that party was founded - at that time a tiny organization.
  Consider the road from that time until today! Consider the wonders which
  have occurred about us.Believe, therefore, because of this wonderful road, also in the course of
  the German people in its coming great future!Germany - Sieg Heil! Sieg Heil! Sieg Heil!Berlin: Hitler's Order Of The Day -- April 6, 1941BERLIN: HITLER'S ORDER OF THE DAYAPRIL 6, 1941From Berlin, Propaganda Minister Goebbels reads
the following Order of the Day to the German Army of the East, in the name
of the Fuehrer:Soldiers of the Southeast Front:Since early this morning the German people are at war with the Belgrade
  Government of intrigue. We shall only lay down arms when this band of ruffians
  has been definitely and most emphatically eliminated, and the last Briton
  has left this part of the European Continent. These misled people realize
  that they must thank Britain for this situation, they must thank England,
  the greatest warmonger of all time.The German people can enter into this new struggle with the inner satisfaction
  that its leaders have done everything to bring about a peaceful settlement.We pray to God that He may lead our soldiers on the path and bless them as
  hitherto.In accordance with the policy of letting others fight for her, as she did
  in the case of Poland, Britain again tried to involve Germany in the struggle
  in which Britain hoped that she would finish off the German people once and
  for all, to win the war, and if possible to destroy the entire German Army.In a few weeks, long ago, the German soldiers on the Eastern Front swept
  aside Poland, the instrument of British policy. On April 9, 1940, Britain
  again attempted to reach its goal by a thrust on the German north flank,
  the thrust at Norway.In an unforgettable struggle the German soldiers in Norway eliminated the
  British within a period of a few weeks.What the world did not deem possible the German people have achieved. Again,
  only a few weeks later, Churchill thought the moment right to make a renewed
  thrust through the British Allies, France and Belgium, into the German region
  of the Ruhr. The victorious hour of our soldiers on the West Front began.It is already war history how the German Armies defeated the legions of
  capitalism and plutocracy. After forty-five days this campaign in the West
  was equally and emphatically terminated.Then Churchill concentrated the strength of his Empire against our ally,
  Italy, in Africa. Now the danger has also been banned from the African theater
  of the war through the co-operation of Italian and German units.The new aim of the British warmongers now consists of the realization of
  a plan that they had already hatched at the outbreak of the war and only
  postponed because of the gigantic victories of the German Army. The memory
  of the landing of British troops at Salonika in the course of the first World
  War also caught little Greece in the spider web of British intrigue.I have repeatedly warned of the attempt by the British to land troops in
  Southeastern Europe, and I have said that this constitutes a threat to the
  German Reich. Unfortunately this warning went unheeded by the Yugoslav nation.
  I have further tried, always with the same patience, to convince Yugoslav
  statesmen of the absolute necessity for their cooperation with the German
  Reich for restoration of lasting peace and order within Yugoslavia.After long effort we finally succeeded in securing the cooperation of Yugoslavia
  by its adherence to the Tripartite Pact without having demanded anything
  whatsoever of the Yugoslav nation except that it take its part in the
  reconstruction of a new order in Europe.At this point the criminal usurpers of the new Belgrade Government took the
  power of the State unto themselves, which is a result of being in the pay
  of Churchill and Britain. As in the case of Poland, this new Belgrade Government
  has mobilized decrepit and old people into their inner Cabinet. Under these
  circumstances I was forced immediately to recall the German national colony
  within Yugoslav territory.Members and officers of the German Embassy, employees of our consulates in
  Yugoslavia were daily being subjected to the most humiliating attacks. The
  German schools, exactly as in Poland, were laid in ruins by bandits. Innumerable
  German nationals were kidnaped and attacked by Yugoslavs and some even were
  killed.In addition, Yugoslavia for weeks has planned a general mobilization of its
  army in great secrecy. This is the answer to my eight-year-long effort to
  bring about closer co-operation and friendship with the Yugoslav people,
  a task that I have pursued most fastidiously.When British divisions were landed in Greece, just as in World War days,
  the Serbs thought the time was ripe for taking advantage of the situation
  for new assassinations against Germany and her allies.Soldiers of the Southeast Front: Now your zero hour has arrived. You will
  now take the interests of the German Reich under your protection as your
  comrades did a year ago in Norway and on the West Front. You will do just
  as well on the Southeast Front.In doing this, your duty, you will not be less courageous than the men of
  those German divisions who in 1915, on the same Balkan soil, fought so
  victoriously. You will be humane only in those places where the enemy is
  humane toward you. Where the enemy confronts you with utter brutality you
  will beat them back with the same weapon.The fight on Greek soil is not a battle against the Greek people, but against
  that archenemy, England, which is again trying to extend the war far into
  the Southeast Balkans, the same as he tried far in the north last year. For
  this reason, on this very spot in the Balkans, we shall fight shoulder to
  shoulder with our ally until the last Briton has found his Dunkerque in Greece.If any Greeks support this British course, then those Greeks will fall at
  the same time as the British.When the German soldier shall have proved himself, shall have proved that
  he is capable of beating the British in the Balkans, in the midst of snow
  and mountains, then also he will have proved that he can beat the British
  in the heat of the desert in Africa.However, we will pursue no other ultimate aim than to win freedom for our
  German people and to secure a living space for the German family.The prayers and thoughts, the very life of all Germans, are again in the
  heart of every German soldier.Berlin, Sportpalast -- Speech of April 8, 1933BERLIN, SPORTPALASTSPEECH OF APRIL 8, 1933THE great epoch which for fourteen years we awaited has now
  begun. Germany is awake now....I can say with pride, comrades of the SA and SS, that if the whole German people now was possessed of the spirit
  which is in us and in you, then Germany would be indestructible. Even without arms, Germany would represent
  an unheard-of strength through this inner will tempered like steel. It is true that this equality which is realized in
  you was realized only at the cost of that freedom of which others spoke. We have, too, adopted the principle of
  leadership, the conception of authority. That was a heavy sacrifice at a time when the whole people was running after
  the illusion of democracy and parliamentarianism, when millions believed that the majority was the source of a
  right decision. It was at this time that we began resolutely to build up an organization in which there was not one
  dictator but ten thousand. When our opponents say: 'It is easy for you: you are a dictator'- we answer them, 'No,
  gentlemen, you are wrong; there is no single dictator, but ten thousand, each in his own place.' And even the highest
  authority in the hierarchy has itself only one wish, never to transgress against the Supreme authority to which it,
  too, is responsible. We have in our Movement developed this loyalty in following the leader, this blind obedience of
  which all the others know nothing and which gave to us the power to surmount everything. For fourteen years we were
  assailed; the attempt was made to bend and break us by cunning, chicanery, and violence, by malice and terror, by
  everything imaginable. But this instrument of blind obedience remained unbroken, remained steadfast. All we endured
  was but tests from which we emerged stronger than ever.In addition we have fostered the virtue of bravery. Today millions are pouring into our ranks. But the greater part of
  them must learn now what this brown army has practiced for years; they must all learn to face what tens of thousands of
  our comrades have faced, and have paid for with their blood, their lives.We have succeeded out of our own free wills in once more inculcating in our people the courage which dares to attempt
  a task in the face of a world of foes.Were the discipline of this Movement not so firm, those who today complain of the sacrifices demanded of them would have
  even more of which to complain. For what we fighters have gained does not compare to the amount of persecution we
  suffered. Let the bellyachers realize that, wherever they are. The Movement trains itself in this perfect discipline
  for the sake of Germany, to save our people from being cast down in the eyes of the world to the level of their opponents.We have also utilized the virtue of persistence, of unwearying patience....It was this virtue which made you, and therefore us, unconquerable, and which saved the nation. Fourteen years of
  struggle. It seems as though fate had saved up so terribly many victims especially for the last year of the struggle.
  Our Brown Shirts prohibited, the members tortured, terror heaped upon terror, and in the end the dissolution of the
  organization. It was a terribly sad time, and I know how hard it was for many to keep their faith that after all the
  hour would come at last. We almost doubted justice and providence. Then came the turning point, and battle after
  battle. Once more many doubted, and some even were beaten down by their doubt. And then came the time when we had to
  say 'No,' when for the first time it seemed that the way to power was opening before us, tempting us: and yet despite
  this we had to remain hard and say 'No, it is not possible in that way.' And for a second time the doors seemed to open
  and for the second time we had to say 'No, impossible.' And then at the third time the hour came and that was given to
  us which we could not but desire, which we had a right to desire, and at last the National Socialist Movement entered
  into the great period of its historic action....We have now won power in Germany, and it is up to us to win the German people, to incorporate the people within the
  power. We must build the millions of our working men of all classes into a close community. This is a struggle which
  will again take years; but it is necessary if the 600,000 men of today are some day to be the six, eight, ten millions
  we need. Here, too, we know that if we rest, we rust, that if we stand still, we will retreat....If in the future you continue to stand behind me as one man, in loyalty and obedience, no power in the world will be
  able to destroy this Movement. It will continue its victorious course. If you preserve the same discipline, the
  same obedience, the same comradeship and the same unbounded loyalty in the future - then nothing will ever extinguish this
  Movement in Germany. This is the request I make of you, for myself and in the name of all the comrades who are no longer
  among us....Our National Socialist Movement, the SA and SS: Sieg Heil, Sieg Heil, Sieg Heil!Munich -- Speech of April 10, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF APRIL 10, 1923...IN THE Bible we find the text, 'That which is neither hot nor cold will
  I spew out of my mouth.' This utterance of the great Nazarene has kept its
  profound validity until the present day. He who would pursue the golden mean
  must surrender the hope of achieving the great and the greatest aims. Until
  the present day the half-hearted and the lukewarm have remained the curse
  of Germany....To the half-heartedness and weakness of the parties in Parliament was added
  the half-heartedness of Governments... Everything stood under the sign of
  half-heartedness and lukewarmness, even the fight for existence in the World
  War and still more the conclusion of peace. And now the continuation of the
  half-hearted policy of those days holds the field. The people, inwardly united
  in the hard struggle-in the trenches there were neither parties nor
  Confessions-has been torn asunder through the economics of profiteers and
  knaves. Appeasement and the settlement of differences would certainly soon
  be there if only one were to hang the whole crew. But profiteers and knaves
  are, of course, 'Citizens of the State,' and what is more important still,
  they are adherents of the religion which is hallowed by the Talmud.EVEN TODAY WE ARE THE LEAST LOVED PEOPLE ON EARTH. A world of foes is ranged
  against us and the German must still today make up his mind whether he intends
  to be a free soldier or a white slave. THE ONLY POSSIBLE CONDITIONS UNDER
  WHICH A GERMAN STATE CAN DEVELOP AT ALL MUST THEREFORE BE: THE UNIFICATION
  OF ALL GERMANS IN EUROPE, education towards a national consciousness, and
  readiness to place the whole national strength without exception in the service
  of the nation. . . .NO ECONOMIC POLICY IS POSSIBLE WITHOUT A SWORD, no industrialization without
  power. Today we have no longer any sword grasped in our fist-how can we have
  a successful economic policy? England has fully recognized this primary maxim
  in the healthy life of States; for centuries England has acted on the principle
  of converting economic strength into political power, while conversely political
  power in its turn must protect economic life. The instinct of self preservation
  can build up economics, but we sought to preserve World Peace instead of
  the interests of the nation, instead of defending the economic life of the
  nation with the sword and of ruthlessly championing those conditions which
  were essential for the life of the people.Three years ago I declared in this same room that the collapse of the German
  national consciousness must carry with it into the abyss the economic life
  of Germany as well. For liberation something more is necessary than an economic
  policy, something more than industry: IF A PEOPLE IS TO BECOME FREE IT NEEDS
  PRIDE AND WILL-POWER, DEFIANCE, HATE, HATE, AND ONCE AGAIN HATE....The spirit comes not down from above, that spirit which is to purify Germany,
  which with its iron besom is to purify the great sty of democracy. To do
  that is the task of our Movement. The Movement must not rust away in Parliament,
  it must not spend itself in superfluous battles of words, but the banner
  with the white circle and the black Swastika will be hoisted over the whole
  of Germany on the day which shall mark the liberation of our whole people.Munich -- Speech of April 12, 1922MUNICHSPEECH OF APRIL 12, 1922AFTER the War production had begun again and it was thought that better times
  were coming, Frederick the Great after the Seven Years War had, as the result
  of superhuman efforts, left Prussia without a penny of debt: at the end of
  the World War Germany was burdened with her own debt of some 7 or 8 milliards
  of marks and beyond that was faced with the debts of 'the rest of the world'
  - the so-called 'reparations.' The product of Germany's work thus belonged
  not to the nation, but to her foreign creditors: 'it was carried endlessly
  in trains for territorities beyond our frontiers.' Every worker had to support
  another worker, the product of whose labor was commandeered by the foreigner.
  'The German people after twenty-five or thirty years, in consequence of the
  fact that it will never be able to pay all that is demanded of it, will have
  so gigantic a sum still owing that practically it will be forced to produce
  more than it does today.' What will the end be? and the answer to that question
  is 'Pledging of our land, enslavement of our labor-strength. Therefore, in
  the economic sphere, November 1918 was in truth no achievement, but it was
  the beginning of our collapse.' And in the political sphere we lost first
  our military prerogatives, and with that loss went the real sovereignty of
  our State, and then our financial independence, for there remained always
  the Reparations Commission so that 'practically we have no longer a politically
  independent German Reich, we are already a colony of the outside world. We
  have contributed to this because so far as possible we humiliated ourselves
  morally, we positively destroyed our own honor and helped to befoul, to besmirch,
  and to deny everything which we previously held as sacred.' If it be objected
  that the Revolution has won for us gains in social life: they must be
  extraordinarily secret, these social gains - so secret that one never sees
  them in practical life - they must just run like a fluid through our German
  atmosphere. Some one may say 'Well, there is the eight-hour day!' And was
  a collapse necessary to gain that? And will the eight-hour day be rendered
  any more secure through our becoming practically the bailiff and the drudge
  of the other peoples? One of these days France will say: You cannot meet
  your obligations, you must work more. So this achievement of the Revolution
  is put in question first of all by the Revolution.Then some one has said: 'Since the Revolution the people has gained Rights.
  The people governs!' Strange! The people has now been ruling three years
  and no one has in practice once asked its opinion. Treaties were signed which
  will hold us down for centuries: and who has signed the treaties? The people?
  No! Governments which one fine day presented themselves as Governments. And
  at their election the people had nothing to do save to consider the question:
  there they are already, whether I elect them or not. If we elect them, then
  they are there through our election. But since we are a self-governing people,
  we must elect the folk in order that they may be elected to govern us.Then it was said, 'Freedom has come to us through the Revolution.' Another
  of those things that one cannot see very easily! It is of course true that
  one can walk down the street, the individual can go into his workshop and
  he can go out again: here and there he can go to a meeting. In a word, the
  individual has liberties. But in general, if he is wise, he will keep his
  mouth shut. For if in former times extraordinary care was taken that no one
  should let slip anything which could be treated as l&egrave;se-majest&eacute;,
  now a man must take much greater care that he doesn't say anything which
  might represent an insult to the majesty of a member of Parliament.And if we ask who was responsible for our misfortune, then we must inquire
  who profited by our collapse. And the answer to that question is that 'Banks
  and Stock Exchanges are more flourishing than ever before.' We were told
  that capitalism would be destroyed, and when we ventured to remind one or
  other of these famous statesmen and said 'Don't forget hat Jews too have
  capital,' then the answer was: 'What are you worrying about? Capitalism as
  a whole will now be destroyed, the whole people will now be free. We are
  not fighting Jewish or Christian capitalism, we are fighting very capitalism:
  we are making the people completely free.'Christian capitalism' is already as good as destroyed, the international
  Jewish Stock Exchange capital gains in proportion as the other loses ground.
  It is only the international Stock Exchange and loan-capital, the so-called
  'supra-state capital,' which has profited from the collapse of our economic
  life, the capital which receives its character from the single supra-state
  nation which is itself national to the core, which fancies itself to be above
  all other nations, which places itself above other nations and which already
  rules over them.The international Stock Exchange capital would be unthinkable, it would never
  have come, without its founders the supra-national, because intensely national,
  Jews....The Jew has not grown poorer: he gradually gets bloated, and, if you don't
  believe me, I would ask you to go to one of our health-resorts; there you
  will find two sorts of visitors: the German who goes there, perhaps for the
  first time for a long while, to breathe a little fresh air and to recover
  his health, and the Jew who goes there to lose his fat. And if you go out
  to our mountains, whom do you find there in fine brand-new yellow boots with
  splendid rucksacks in which there is generally nothing that would really
  be of any use? And why are they there? They go up to the hotel, usually no
  further than the train can take them: where the train stops, they stop too.
  And then they sit about somewhere within a mile from the hotel, like blow-flies
  round a corpse.These are not, you may be sure, our working classes: neither those working
  with the mind, nor with the body. With their worn clothes they leave the
  hotel on one side and go on climbing: they would not feel comfortable coming
  into this perfumed atmosphere in suits which date from 1913 or 1914. No,
  assuredly the Jew has suffered no privations! . . .While now in Soviet Russia the millions are ruined and are dying, Chicherin
  - and with him a staff of over 200 Soviet Jews - travels by express train
  through Europe, visits the cabarets, watches naked dancers perform for his
  pleasure, lives in the finest hotels, and does himself better than the millions
  whom once you thought you must fight as 'bourgeois.' The 400 Soviet Commissars
  of Jewish nationality - they do not suffer; the thousands upon thousands
  of sub-Commissars -they do not suffer. No! all the treasures which the
  'proletarian' in his madness took from the 'bourgeoise' in order to fight
  so-called capitalism - they have all gone into their hands. Once the worker
  appropriated the purse of the landed proprietor who gave him work, he took
  the rings, the diamonds and rejoiced that he had now got the treasures which
  before only the 'bourgeoisie' possessed. But in his hands they are dead things
  - they are veritable death-gold. They are no profit to him. He is banished
  into his wilderness and one cannot feed oneself on diamonds. For a morsel
  of bread he gives millions in objects of value. But the bread is in the hands
  of the State Central Organization and this is in the hands of the Jews: so
  everything, everything that the common man thought that he was winning for
  himself, flows back again to his seducers.And now, my dear fellow-countrymen, do you believe that these men, who with
  us are going the same way, will end the Revolution? They do not wish the
  end of the Revolution, for they do not need it. For them the Revolution is
  milk and honey.And further they cannot end the Revolution. For if one or another amongst
  the leaders were really not seducer but seduced, and today, driven by the
  inner voice of horror at his crime, were to step before the masses and make
  his declaration: 'We have all deceived ourselves: we believed that we could
  lead you out of misery, but we have in fact led you into a misery which your
  children and your children's children must still bear' - he cannot say that,
  he dare not say that, he would on the public square or in the public meeting
  be torn in pieces.But amongst the masses there begins to flow a new stream - a stream of
  opposition. It is the recognition of the facts which is already in pursuit
  of this system, it already is hunting the system down; it will one day scourge
  the masses into action and carry the masses along with it. And these leaders,
  they see that behind them the anti-Semitic wave grows and grows; and when
  the masses once recognize the facts, that is the end of these leaders.And thus the Left is forced more and more to turn to Bolshevism. In Bolshevism
  they see today the sole, the last possibility of preserving the present state
  of affairs. They realize quite accurately that the people is beaten so long
  as Brain and Hand can be kept apart. For alone neither Brain nor Hand can
  really oppose them. So long therefore as the Socialist idea is coined only
  by men who see in it a means for disintegrating a nation, so long can they
  rest in peace.But it will be a sorry day for them when this Socialist idea is grasped by
  a Movement which unites it with the highest Nationalist pride, with Nationalist
  defiance, and thus places the Nation's Brain, its intellectual workers, on
  this ground. Then this system will break up, and there would remain only
  one single means of salvation for its supporters: viz. to bring the catastrophe
  upon us before their own ruin, to destroy the Nation's Brain, to bring it
  to the scaffold - to introduce Bolshevism.So the Left neither can nor will help. On the contrary, their first lie compels
  them constantly to resort to new lies. There remains then the Right. And
  this party of the Right meant well, but it cannot do what it would because
  up to the present time it has failed to recognize a whole series of elementary
  principles.In the first place the Right still fails to recognize the danger. These gentlemen
  still persist in believing that it is a question of being elected to a Landtag
  or of posts as ministers or secretaries. They think that the decision of
  a people's destiny would mean at worst nothing more than some damage to their
  so-called bourgeois-economic existence. They have never grasped the fact
  that this decision threatens their heads. They have never yet understood
  that it is not necessary to be an enemy of the Jew for him to drag you one
  day, on the Russian model, to the scaffold. They do not see that it is quite
  enough to have a head on your shoulders and not to be a Jew: that will secure
  the scaffold for you.In consequence their whole action today is so petty, so limited, so hesitating
  and pusillanimous. They would like to - but they can never decide on any
  great deed, because they fail to realize the greatness of the whole period.And then there is another fundamental error: they have never got it clear
  in their own minds that there is a difference or how great a difference there
  is between the conception 'National' and the word 'dynastic' or 'monarchistic.'
  They do not understand that today it is more than ever necessary in our thoughts
  as Nationalists to avoid anything which might perhaps cause the individual
  to think that the National Idea was identical with petty everyday political
  views. They ought day by day to din into the ears of the masses: 'We want
  to bury all the petty differences and to bring out into the light the big
  things, the things we have in common which bind us to one another. That should
  weld and fuse together those who have still a German heart and a love for
  their people in the fight against the common hereditary foe of all Aryans.
  How afterward we divide up this State, friends - we have no wish to dispute
  over that! The form of a State results from the essential character of a
  people, results from necessities which are so elementary and powerful that
  in time every individual will realize them without any disputation when once
  all Germany is united and free.'And finally they all fail to understand that we must on principle free ourselves
  from any class standpoint. It is of course very easy to call out to those
  on the Left, 'You must not be proletarians, leave your class-madness,' while
  you yourselves continue to call yourself 'bourgeois.' They should learn that
  in a single State there is only one supreme citizen - right, one supreme
  citizen - honor, and that is the right and the honor of honest work. They
  should further learn that the social idea must be the essential foundation
  for any State, otherwise no State can permanently endure.Certainly a government needs power, it needs strength. It must, I might almost
  say, with brutal ruthlessness press through the ideas which it has recognized
  to be right, trusting to the actual authority of its strength in the State.
  But even with the most ruthless brutality it can ultimately prevail only
  if what it seeks to restore does truly correspond to the welfare of a whole
  people.That the so-called enlightened absolutism of a Frederick the Great was possible
  depended solely on the fact that, though this man could undoubtedly have
  decided 'arbitrarily' the destiny - for good or ill - of his so-called
  'subjects,' he did not do so, but made his decisions influenced and supported
  by one thought alone, the welfare of his Prussian people. It was this fact
  only that led the people to tolerate willingly, nay joyfully, the dictatorship
  of the great king.AND THE RIGHT HAS FURTHER COMPLETELY FORGOTTEN THAT DEMOCRACY IS FUNDAMENTALLY
  NOT GERMAN: IT IS JEWISH. It has completely forgotten that this Jewish democracy
  with its majority decisions has always been without exception only a means
  towards the destruction of any existing Aryan leadership. The Right does
  not understand that directly every small question of profit or loss is regularly
  put before so-called 'public opinion,' he who knows how most skilfully to
  make this 'public opinion' serve his own interests becomes forthwith master
  in the State. And that can be achieved by the man who can lie most artfully,
  most infamously; and in the last resort he is not the German, he is, in
  Schopenhauer's words, 'the great master in the art of lying' - the Jew.And finally it has been forgotten that the condition which must precede every
  act is the will and the courage to speak the truth - and that we do not see
  today either in the Right or in the Left.There are only two possibilities in Germany; do not imagine that the people
  will forever go with the middle party, the party of compromises; one day
  it will turn to those who have most consistently foretold the coming ruin
  and have sought to dissociate themselves from it. And that party is either
  the Left: and then God help us! for it will lead us to complete destruction
  - to Bolshevism, or else it is a party of the Right which at the last, when
  the people is in utter despair, when it has lost all its spirit and has no
  longer any faith in anything, is determined for its part ruthlessly to seize
  the reins of power - that is the beginning of resistance of which I spoke
  a few minutes ago. Here, too, there can be no compromise - there are only
  two possibilities: either victory of the Aryan, or annihilation of the Aryan
  and the victory of the Jew.It is from the recognition of this fact, from recognizing it, I would say,
  in utter, dead earnestness, that there resulted the formation of our Movement.
  There are two principles which, when we founded the Movement, we engraved
  upon our hearts: first, to base it on the most sober recognition of the facts,
  and second, to proclaim these facts with the most ruthless sincerity.And this recognition of the facts discloses at once a whole series of the
  most important fundamental principles which must guide this young Movement
  which, we hope, is destined one day for greatness:1. 'NATIONAL' AND 'SOCIAL' ARE TWO IDENTICAL CONCEPTIONS. It was only the
  Jew who succeeded, through falsifying the social idea and turning it into
  Marxism, not only in divorcing the social idea from the national, but in
  actually representing them as utterly contradictory. That aim he has in fact
  achieved. At the founding of this Movement we formed the decision that we
  would give expression to this idea of ours of the identity of the two
  conceptions: despite all warnings, on the basis of what we had come to believe,
  on the basis of the sincerity of our will, we christened it ''National
  Socialist.' We said to ourselves that to be 'national' means above everything
  to act with a boundless and all-embracing love for the people and, if necessary,
  even to die for it. And similarly to be 'social' means so to build up the
  state and the community of the people that every individual acts in the interest
  of the community of the people and must be to such an extent convinced of
  the goodness, of the honorable straightforwardness of this community of the
  people as to be ready to die for it.2. And then we said to ourselves: THERE ARE NO SUCH THINGS AS CLASSES: THEY
  CANNOT BE. Class means caste and caste means race. If there are castes in
  India, well and good; there it is possible, for there there were formerly
  Aryans and dark aborigines. So it was in Egypt and in Rome. But with us in
  Germany where everyone who is a German at all has the same blood, has the
  same eyes, and speaks the same language, here there can be no class, here
  there can be only a single people and beyond that nothing else. Certainly
  we recognize, just as anyone must recognize, that there are different
  'occupations' and 'professions' [St&auml;nde]-there is the Stand of the
  watchmakers, the Stand of the common laborers, the Stand of the painters
  or technicians, the Stand of the engineers, officials, etc. St&auml;nde there
  can be. But in the struggles which these St&auml;nde have amongst themselves
  for the equalization of their economic conditions, the conflict and the division
  must never be so great as to sunder the ties of race.And if you say 'But there must after all be a difference between the honest
  creators and those who do nothing at all' - certainly there must! That is
  the difference which lies in the performance of the conscientious work of
  the individual. Work must be the great connecting link, but at the same time
  the great factor which separates one man from another. The drone is the foe
  of us all. But the creators - it matters not whether they are brain workers
  or workers with the hand - they are the nobility of our State, they are the
  German people!We understand under the term 'work' exclusively that activity which not only
  profits the individual but in no way harms the community, nay rather which
  contributes to form the community.3. And in the third place IT WAS CLEAR TO US THAT THIS PARTICULAR VIEW IS
  BASED ON AN IMPULSE WHICH SPRINGS FROM OUR RACE AND FROM OUR BLOOD. We said
  to ourselves that race differs from race and, further, that each race in
  accordance with its fundamental demands shows externally certain specific
  tendencies, and these tendencies can perhaps be most clearly traced in their
  relation to the conception of work. The Aryan regards work as the foundation
  for the maintenance of the community of people amongst it members. The Jew
  regards work as the means to the exploitation of other peoples. The Jew never
  works as a productive creator without the great aim of becoming the master.
  He works unproductively using and enjoying other people's work. And thus
  we understand the iron sentence which Mommsen once uttered: 'The Jew is the
  ferment of decomposition in peoples,' that means that the Jew destroys and
  must destroy because he completely lacks the conception of an activity which
  builds up the life of the community. And therefore it is beside the point
  whether the individual Jew is 'decent' or not. In himself he carries those
  characteristics which Nature has given him, and he cannot ever rid himself
  of those characteristics. And to us he is harmful. Whether he harms us
  consciously or unconsciously, that is not our affair. We have consciously
  to concern ourselves for the welfare of our own people.4. And fourthly WE WERE FURTHER PERSUADED THAT ECONOMIC PROSPERITY IS INSEPARABLE
  FROM POLITICAL FREEDOM AND THAT THEREFORE THAT HOUSE OF LIES, 'INTERNATIONALISM,'
  MUST IMMEDIATELY COLLAPSE. We recognized that freedom can eternally be only
  a consequence of power and that the source of power is the will. Consequently
  the will to power must be strengthened in a people with passionate ardor.
  And thus we realized fifthly that5. WE AS NATIONAL SOCIALISTS and members of the German Workers party - a
  Party pledged to work - MUST BE ON PRINCIPLE THE MOST FANATICAL NATIONALISTS.
  We realized that the State can be for our people a paradise only if the people
  can hold sway therein freely as in a paradise: we realized that a slave state
  will never be a paradise, but only - always and for all time - a hell or
  a colony.6. And then sixthly we grasped the fact that POWER IN THE LAST RESORT IS
  POSSIBLE ONLY WHERE THERE IS STRENGTH, and that strength lies not in the
  dead weight of numbers but solely in energy. Even the smallest minority can
  achieve a mighty result if it is inspired by the most fiery, the most pas
  sionate will to act. World history has always been made by minorities. And
  lastly7. If one has realized a truth, that truth is valueless so long as there
  is lacking the indomitable will to turn this realization into action!These were the foundations of our Movement - the truths on which it was based
  and which demonstrated its necessity.For three years we have sought to realize these fundamental ideas. And of
  course a fight is and remains a fight. Stroking in very truth will not carry
  one far. Today the German people has been beaten by a quite other world,
  while in its domestic life it has lost all spirit; no longer has it any faith.
  But how will you give this people once more firm ground beneath its feet
  save by the passionate insistence on one definite, great, clear goal?Thus we were the first to declare that this peace treaty was a crime. Then
  folk abused us as 'agitators.' We were the first to protest against the failure
  to present this treaty to the people before it was signed. Again we were
  called 'agitators.' We were the first to summon men to resistance against
  being reduced to a continuing state of defenselessness. Once more we were
  'agitators.' At that time we called on the masses of the people not to surrender
  their arms, for the surrender of one's arms would be nothing less than the
  beginning of enslavement. We were called, no, we were cried down as, 'agitators.'
  We were the first to say that this meant the loss of Upper Silesia. So it
  was, and still they called us 'agitators.' We declared at that time that
  compliance in the question of Upper Silesia MUST have as its consequence
  the awakening of a passionate greed which would demand the occupation of
  the Ruhr. We were cried down ceaselessly, again and again. And because we
  opposed the mad financial policy which today will lead to our collapse, what
  was it that we were called repeatedly once more? 'Agitators,' And today?And finally we were also the first to point the people on any large scale
  to a danger which insinuated itself into our midst - a danger which millions
  failed to realize and which will nonetheless lead us all into ruin - the
  Jewish danger. And today people are saying yet again that we were 'agitators.'
  I would like here to appeal to a greater than I, Count Lerchenfeld. He said
  in the last session of the Landtag that his feeling 'as a man and a Christian'
  prevented him from being an anti-Semite. I SAY: MY FEELING AS A CHRISTIAN
  POINTS ME TO MY LORD AND SAVIOUR AS A FIGHTER. IT POINTS ME TO THE MAN WHO
  ONCE IN LONELINESS, SURROUNDED ONLY BY A FEW FOLLOWERS, RECOGNIZED THESE
  JEWS FOR WHAT THEY WERE AND SUMMONED MEN TO THE FIGHT AGAINST THEM AND WHO,
  GOD'S TRUTH! WAS GREATEST NOT AS SUFFERER BUT AS FIGHTER. In boundless love
  as a Christian and as a man I read through the passage which tells us how
  the Lord at last rose in His might and seized the scourge to drive out of
  the Temple the brood of vipers and of adders. How terrific was His fight
  for the world against the Jewish poison. Today, after two thousand years,
  with deepest emotion I recognize more profoundly than ever before - the fact
  that it was for this that He had to shed His blood upon the Cross. As a Christian
  I have no duty to allow myself to be cheated, but I have the duty to be a
  fighter for truth and justice. And as a man I have the duty to see to it
  that human society does not suffer the same catastrophic collapse as did
  the civilization of the ancient world some two thousand years ago - a
  civilization which was driven to its ruin through this same Jewish people.Then indeed when Rome collapsed there were endless streams of new German
  bands flowing into the Empire from the North; but, if Germany collapses today,
  who is there to come after us? German blood upon this earth is on the way
  to gradual exhaustion unless we pull ourselves together and make ourselves
  free!And if there is anything which could demonstrate that we are acting rightly,
  it is the distress which daily grows. For as a Christian I have also a duty
  to my own people. And when I look on my people I see it work and work and
  toil and labor, and at the end of the week it has only for its wage wretchedness
  and misery. When I go out in the morning and see these men standing in their
  queues and look into their pinched faces, then I believe I would be no Christian,
  but a very devil, if I felt no pity for them, if I did not, as did our Lord
  two thousand years ago, turn against those by whom today this poor people
  is plundered and exploited.And through the distress there is no doubt that the people has been aroused.
  Externally perhaps apathetic, but within there is ferment. And many may say,
  'It is an accursed crime to stir up passions in the people.' And then I say
  to myself: Passion is already stirred through the rising tide of distress,
  and one day this passion will break out in one way or another: AND NOW I
  WOULD ASK THOSE WHO TODAY CALL US 'AGITATORS': 'WHAT THEN HAVE YOU TO GIVE
  TO THE PEOPLE AS A FAITH TO WHICH IT MIGHT CLING?'Nothing at all, for you yourselves have no faith in your own prescriptions.That is the mightiest thing which our Movement must create: for these widespread,
  seeking and straying masses a new Faith which will not fail them in this
  hour of confusion, to which they can pledge themselves, on which they can
  build so that they may at least find once again a place which may bring calm
  to their hearts.Munich -- Speech of April 13, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF APRIL 13, 1923. . . IN OUR view, the times when there was no 'League of Nations' were far
  more honorable and more humane.... We ask: 'Must there be wars?' The pacifist
  answers 'No!' He proceeds to explain that disputes in the life of peoples
  are only the expression of the fact that a class has been oppressed by the
  ruling bourgeoisie. When there are in fact differences of opinion between
  peoples, then these should be brought before a 'Peace Court' for its decision.
  But he does not answer the question whether the judges of this court of
  arbitration would have the power to bring the parties before the bar of the
  court. I believe that an accused ordinarily only appears 'voluntarily' before
  a court because, if he did not, he would be fetched there.I should like to see the nation which would allow itself to be brought before
  this League of Nations Court in the case of a disagreement without external
  force. In the life of nations, what in the last resort decides questions
  is a kind of Judgment Court of God. It may even happen that in case of a
  dispute between two peoples - both may be in the right. Thus Austria, a people
  of fifty millions, had most certainly the right to an outlet to the sea.
  But since in the strip of territory in question the Italian element of the
  population was in the majority, Italy claimed for herself the 'right of
  self-determination.' Who yields voluntarily? No one! So the strength which
  each people possesses decides the day. ALWAYS BEFORE GOD AND THE WORLD THE
  STRONGER HAS THE RIGHT TO CARRY THROUGH WHAT HE WILLS.History proves: He who has not the strength - him the 'right in itself' profits
  not a whit. A world court without a world police would be a joke. And from
  what nations of the present League of Nations would then this force be recruited?
  Perhaps from the ranks of the old German Army? THE WHOLE WORLD OF NATURE
  IS A MIGHTY STRUGGLE BETWEEN STRENGTH AND WEAKNESS - AN ETERNAL VICTORY OF
  THE STRONG OVER THE WEAK. There would be nothing but decay in the whole of
  Nature if this were not so. States which should offend against the elementary
  law would fall into decay. You need not seek for long to find an example
  of such mortal decay: you can see it in the Reich of today..... . . Before the war two States, Germany and France, had to live side by
  side but only under arms. It is true that the War of 1870-1 meant for Germany
  the close of an enmity which had endured for centuries, but in France a
  passionate hatred against Germany was fostered by every means by propaganda
  in the press, in school textbooks, in theaters, in the cinemas. . . . All
  the Jewish papers throughout France agitated against Berlin. Here again to
  seek and to exploit grounds for a conflict is the clearly recognizable effort
  of world Jewry.The conflict of interests between Germany and England lay in the economic
  sphere. Up till 1850 England's position as a World Power was undisputed.
  British engineers, British trade conquer the world. Germany, owing to greater
  industry and increased capacity, begins to be a dangerous rival. In a short
  time those firms which in Germany were in English hands pass into the possession
  of German industrialists. German industry expands vastly and the products
  of that industry even in the London market drive out British goods.The protective measure, the stamp 'Made in Germany,' has the opposite effect
  from that desired: this 'protective stamp' becomes a highly effective
  advertisement. The German economic success was not created in Essen alone
  but by a man who knew that behind economics must stand power, for power alone
  makes an economic position secure. This power was born upon the battlefields
  of 1870-71, not in the atmosphere of parliamentary chatter. Forty thousand
  dead have rendered possible the life of forty millions. When England, in
  the face of such a Germany as this, threatened to be brought to her knees,
  then she bethought herself of the last weapon in the armory of international
  rivalry - violence. A press propaganda on an imposing scale was started as
  a preparatory measure.But who is the chief of the whole British press concerned with world trade?
  One name crystallizes itself out of the rest: Northcliffe - a Jew! . . .
  A campaign of provocation is carried on with assertions, libels, and promises
  such as only a Jew can devise, such as only Jewish newspapers would have
  the effrontery to put before an Aryan people. And then at last 1914: they
  egg people on: 'Ah, poor violated Belgium! Up! To the rescue of the small
  nations - for the honor of humanity!' The same lies, the same provocation
  throughout the entire world! And the success of that provocation the German
  people can trace grievously enough!WHAT CAUSE FINALLY HAD AMERICA TO ENTER THE WAR AGAINST GERMANY? WITH THE
  OUTBREAK OF THE WORLD WAR, WHICH JUDAH HAD DESIRED SO PAASSIONATELY AND SO
  LONG, ALL THE LARGEJEWISH FIRMS OF THE UNITED STATES BEGAN SUPPLYING AMMUNITIONS. They supplied
  the European 'war-market' to an extent which perhaps even they themselves
  had never dreamed of - a gigantic harvest! Yet nothing satisfied the insatiable
  greed of the Jew. And so the venal press which depended upon the Stock Exchange
  kings began an unparalleled propaganda campaign. A GIGANTIC ORGANIZATION
  FOR NEWSPAPER LYING WAS BUILT UP. AND ONCE MORE IT IS A JEWISH CONCERN, THE
  HEARST PRESS, WHICH SET THE TONE OF THE AGITATION AGAINST GERMANY.The hatred of these 'Americans' was not directed solely against commercial
  Germany or against military Germany. It was directed specially against social
  Germany, because this Germany had up to that time kept itself outside of
  the principles which governed the world trusts. The old Reich had at least
  made an honorable attempt to be socially-minded. We had to show for ourselves
  such an initiative in social institutions as no other country in the wide
  world could boast. . . . This explains why, even in Germany itself, the
  'comrades' under Jewish leadership fought against their own vital interests.
  This explains the agitation carried on throughout the world under the same
  watchword.For this reason the Jewish-democratic press of America had to accomplish
  its masterpiece - that is to say, it had to drive into the most horrible
  of all wars a great peace-loving people which was as little concerned in
  European struggles as it was in the North Pole: America was to intervene
  'in defense of civilization,' and the Americans were persuaded so to do by
  an atrocity propaganda conducted in the name of civilization which from A
  to Z was a scandalous invention the like of which has never yet been seen
  - a farrago of lies and forgeries. Because this last State in the world where
  social aims were being realized had to be destroyed, therefore twenty-six
  peoples were incited one against the other by this press which is exclusively
  in the possession of one and the same world people, of one and the same race,
  and that race on principle the deadly foe of all national States.Who could have prevented the World War? Not the Kul- tursolidarit&auml;t,
  the 'solidarity of civilization,' in whose name the Jews carried on their
  propaganda: not the so-called World Pacifism - again an exclusively Jewish
  invention. Could the so-called 'Solidarity of the Proletariat?' . . . All
  the wheels stand silent, still, If that be your strong arm's will.... The
  German wheel on November 9, 1918, was indeed brought to a standstill. The
  Social Democratic party in its principal organ, Vorw&auml;rts, declared in
  so many words that it was not in the interest of the workers that Germany
  should win the war. . .Could the Freemasons perhaps stop the war? - this most noble of philanthropic
  institutions who foretold the good fortune of the people louder than anyone
  and who at the same time was the principal leader in promoting the war. Who,
  after all, are the Freemasons? You have to distinguish two grades. To the
  lower grade in Germany belong the ordinary citizens who through the claptrap
  which is served up to them can feel themselves to be 'somebodies,' but the
  responsible authorities are those many-sided folk who can stand any climate,
  those 300 Rathenaus who all know each other, who guide the history of the
  world over the heads of Kings and Presidents, those who will undertake any
  office without scruples, who know how brutally to enslave all peoples - once
  more the Jews!Why have the Jews been against Germany? That is made quite clear today -
  proved by countless facts. They use the age-old tactics of the hyena - when
  fighters are tired out, then go for them! Then make your harvest! In war
  and revolutions the Jew attained the unattainable. Hundreds of thousands
  of escaped Orientals become modern 'Europeans.' Times of unrest produce miracles.
  Before 1914 how long would it have taken, for instance, in Bavaria before
  a Galician Jew became - Prime Minister? - Or in Russia before an anarchist
  from the New York Ghetto, Bronstein (Trotsky), became - Dictator? Only a
  few wars and revolutions - that was enough to put the Jewish people into
  possession of the red gold and thereby to make them masters of the world.Before 1914 there were two States above all, Germany and Russia, which prevented
  the Jew from reaching his goal - the mastery of the world. Here not everything
  which they already possessed in the Western democracies had fallen to the
  Jews. Here they were not the sole lords alike in the intellectual and economic
  life. Here, too, the Parliaments were not yet exclusively instruments of
  Jewish capital and of the will of the Jew. The German and the genuine Russian
  had still preserved a certain aloofness from the Jew. In both peoples there
  still lived the healthy instinct of scorn for the Jew, and there was a real
  danger that in these monarchies there might one day arise a Frederick the
  Great, a William I, and that democracy and a parliamentary regime might be
  sent to the devil.So the Jews became revolutionaries! The Republic should bring them to wealth
  and to power. This aim they disguised: they cried 'Down with the monarchies!'
  'Enthrone the sovereign people!' I do not know whether today one could venture
  to call the German or the Russian people 'sovereign.' At least one cannot
  see any trace of it! What the German people can trace, however, what every
  day stands in the most crass form before its eyes, is debauchery, gluttony,
  speculation ruling unchecked, the open mockery of the Jew....So Russia and Germany had to be overthrown in order that the ancient prophecy
  might be fulfilled. So the whole world was lashed into fury. So every lie
  and propaganda agency was brutally set in action against the State of the
  last - the German - idealists! AND THUS IT WAS THAT JUDAH WON THE WORLD WAR.
  OR WOULD YOU WISH TO MAINTAIN THAT THE FRENCH, THE ENGLISH, OR THE AMERICAN
  'PEOPLE' WON THE WAR? THEY, ONE AND ALL, VICTORS AND VANQUISHED ARE ALIKE
  DEFEATED: one thing raises itself above them all: the World Stock Exchange
  which has become the master of the people.WHAT GUILT HAD GERMANY HERSELF FOR THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR? HER GUILT CONSISTED
  IN THIS: THAT AT THE MOMENT WHEN THE RING CLOSED ABOUT HER EXISTENCE GERMANY
  NEGLECTED TO ORGANIZE HER DEFENSE WITH SUCH VIGOR THAT THROUGH THIS DEMONSTRATION
  OF HER POWER EITHER THE OTHERS, DESPITE THEIR ABOMINABLE PURPOSES, WOULD
  HAVE BEEN ROBBED OF THEIR WILL TO STRIKE, OR ELSE THE VICTORY OF THE REICH
  WOULD HAVE BEEN ASSURED.The guilt of the German people lies in this: that when in 1912 a criminal
  Reichstag in its unfathomable baseness and folly had refused to allow the
  raising of three army corps the people did not create for itself those army
  corps in the Reichstag's despite. With these additional 120,000 men the Battle
  of the Marne would have been won and the issue of the war decided. Two million
  fewer German heroes would have sunk into their graves. Who was it who in
  1912 as in 1918 struck its weapons from the hands of the German people? Who
  was it that in 1912, as in the last year of the war, infatuated the German
  people with his theory that if Germany throws down her arms the whole world
  will follow her example - who? - the democratic-Marxist Jew, who at the same
  hour incited and still today incites the others to arm and to subjugate
  'barbarous' Germany.But someone may perhaps yet raise the question whether it is expedient today
  to talk about the guilt for the war. Most assuredly we have the duty to talk
  about it! For the murderers of our Fatherland who all the years through have
  betrayed and sold Germany, they are the same men who, as the November criminals,
  have plunged us into the depths of misfortune. We have the duty to speak
  since in the near future, when we have gained power, we shall have the further
  duty of taking these creators of ruin, these clouts, these traitors to their
  State and of hanging them on the gallows to which they belong. Only let no
  one think that in them there has come a change of heart. On the contrary,
  these November scoundrels who still are free to go as they will in our midst,
  they are, even today, going against us. From the recognition of the facts
  comes the will to rise again. Two millions have remained on the field of
  battle. They, too, have their rights and not we, the survivors, alone. There
  are millions of orphans, of cripples, of widows in our midst. They, too,
  have rights. For the Germany of today not one of them died, not one of them
  became a cripple, an orphan, or a widow. We owe it to these millions that
  we build a new Germany!Munich -- Speech of April 24, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF APRIL 24, 1923. . . I REJECT the word 'Proletariat.' The Jew who coined the word meant
  by 'Proletariat,' not the oppressed, but those who work with their hands.
  And those who work with their intellects are stigmatized bluntly as 'Bourgeois.'
  It is not the character of a man's life which forms the basis of this
  classification, it is simply the occupation - whether a man works with his
  brain or with his body. And in this turbulent mass of the hand-workers the
  Jew recognized a new power which might perhaps be his instrument for the
  gaining of that which is his ultimate goal: World supremacy, the destruction
  of the national States.And while the Jew 'organizes' these masses, he organizes business, too, at
  the same time. Business was depersonalized, i.e., Judaized. Business lost
  the Aryan character of work: it became an object of speculation. Master and
  man were torn asunder . . . and he who created this class division was the
  same person who led the masses in their opposition to this class division,
  led them not against his Jewish brethren, but against the last remnants of
  independent national economic life.And these remnants, the bourgeoisie which also was already Judaized, resisted
  the great masses who were knocking at the door and demanding better conditions
  of life. And so the Jewish leaders succeeded in hammering into the minds
  of the masses the Marxist propaganda: 'Your deadly foe is the bourgeoisie;
  if he were not there, you would be free.' If it had not been for the boundless
  blindness and stupidity of our bourgeoisie the Jew would never have become
  the leader of the German working-classes. And the ally of this stupidity
  was the pride of the 'better stratum' of society which thought it would degrade
  itself if it condescended to stoop to the level of the 'Plebe.' The millions
  of our German fellow countrymen would never have been alienated from their
  people if the leading strata of society had shown any care for their welfare.You must say farewell to the hope that you can expect any action from the
  parties of the Right on behalf of the freedom of the German people. The most
  elementary factor is lacking: the will, the courage, the energy. Where then
  can any strength still be found within the German people? It is to be found,
  as always, in the great masses: THERE ENERGY IS SLUMBERING AND IT ONLY AWAITS
  THE MAN WHO WILL SUMMON IT FROM ITS PRESENT SLUMBER AND WILL HURL IT INTO
  THE GREAT BATTLE FOR THE DESTINY OF THE GERMAN RACE.The battle which alone can liberate Germany will be fought out with the forces
  which well up from the great masses. Without the help of the German workingman
  you will never regain a German Reich. Not in our political salons lies the
  strength of the nation, but in the hand, in the brain, and in the will of
  the great masses. Now as ever: Liberation does not come down from above,
  it will spring up from below.... If we today make the highest demands upon
  everyone, that is only in order that we may give back to him and to his child
  the highest gift: Freedom and the respect of the rest of the world....The parties of the Right have lost all energy: they see the flood coming,
  but their one longing is just for once in their lives to form a Government.
  Unspeakably incapable, utterly lacking in energy, cowards all - such are
  all these bourgeois parties and that at the moment when the nation needs
  heroes -not chatterers.In the Left there is somewhat more energy, but it is used for the ruin of
  Germany. The Communists on principle reject the discipline imposed by the
  State: in its stead they preach party discipline: they reject the administration
  of the State as a bureaucracy, while they fall on their knees before the
  bureaucracy of their own Movement. There is arising a State within the State
  which stands in deadly enmity against the State which we know, the State
  of the community of the people. This new State ultimately produces men who
  reject with fanaticism their own people so that in the end Foreign Powers
  find in them their allies. Such is the result of Marxist teaching....What we want is not a State of drones but a State which gives to everyone
  that to which on the basis of his own activity he has a right. He who refuses
  to do honest work shall not be a citizen of the State. The State is not a
  plantation where the interests of foreign capital are supreme. Capital is
  not the master of the State, but its servant. Therefore the State must not
  be brought into dependence on international loan capital. And if anyone believes
  that that cannot be avoided, then do not let him be surprised that no one
  is ready to give his life for this State. Further, that greatest injustice
  must be corrected which today still weighs heavily upon our people and upon
  almost all peoples. If in a State only he who does honest work is a citizen,
  then everyone has the right to demand that in his old age he shall be kept
  free from care and want. That would mean the realization of the greatest
  social achievement.Munich -- Speech of April 27, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF APRIL 27, 1923. . . WHAT we need if we are to have a real People's State is a land reform....
  We do not believe that the mere dividing up of the land can by itself bring
  any alleviation. The conditions of a nation's life can in the last resort
  be bettered only through the political will to expansion. Therein lies the
  essential characteristic of a sound reform.And land [Grund und Boden], we must insist, cannot be made an object for
  speculation. Private property can be only that which a man has gained for
  himself, has won through his work. A natural product is not private property,
  that is national property. Land is thus no object for bargaining.Further, there must be a reform in our law. Our present law regards only
  the rights of the individual. It does not regard the protection of the race,
  the protection of the community of the people. It permits the befouling of
  the nation's honor and of the greatness of the nation. A law which is so
  far removed from the conception of the community of the people is in need
  of reform.Further, changes are needed in our system of education. We suffer today from
  an excess of culture [Ueberbildung] Only knowledge is valued. But wiseacres
  are the enemies of action. What we need is instinct and will. Most people
  have lost both through their 'culture.' We have, it is true, a highly
  intellectual class, but it is lacking in energy. If, through our overvaluation
  of mechanical knowledge, we had not so far removed ourselves from popular
  sentiment, the Jew would never have found his way to our people so easily
  as he has done. What we need is the possibility of a continuous succession
  of intellectual leaders drawn from the people itself.Clear away the Jews! Our own people has genius enough - we need no Hebrews.
  If we were to put in their place intelligences drawn from the great body
  of our people, then we should have recovered the bridge which leads to the
  community of the people.AGAIN, WE NEED A REFORM OF THE GERMAN PRESS.A press which is on principle anti-national cannot be tolerated in Germany.
  Whoever denies the nation can have no part in it. We must demand that the
  press shall become the instrument of the national self-education.FINALLY WE NEED A REFORM IN THE SPHERE OF ART, LITERATURE, AND THE THEATER.
  The Government must see to it that its people is not poisoned. There is a
  higher right which is based on the recognition of that which harms a people,
  and that which harms a people must be done away with.And after this reform we shall come to recognize the duty of self-preservation.
  A man who says: 'I deny that I have a right to defend my personal life' has
  thereby denied his right to exist. TO BE A PACIFIST ARGUES A LACK OF CONVICTION,
  A LACK OF CHARACTER. For the pacifist is indeed ready enough to claim the
  help of others, but himself declines to defend himself. It is precisely the
  same with a people. A people which is not prepared to protect itself is a
  people without character. We must recover for our people as one of its most
  elementary principles the recognition of the fact that a man is truly man
  only if he defends and protects himself, that a people deserves that name
  only if in case of necessity it is prepared as a people to enter the lists.
  That is not militarism, that is self-preservation.THEREFORE WE NATIONAL SOCIALISTS STAND FOR COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE FOR
  EVERY MAN. If a State is not worth that - then away with it! Then you must
  not complain if you are enslaved. But if you believe that you must be free,
  then you must learn to recognize that no one gives you freedom save only
  your own sword. What our people needs is not leaders in Parliament, but those
  who are determined to carry through what they see to be right before God,
  before the world, and before their own consciences - and to carry that through,
  if need be, in the teeth of majorities. And if we succeed in raising such
  leaders from the body of our people, then around them once again a nation
  will crystallize itself... It is the pride of our Movement to be the force
  which shall awake the Germany of fighters which yet shall be.Munich -- Speech of May 1, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF MAY 1, 1923. . . IF THE first of May is to be transferred in accordance with its true
  meaning from the life of Nature to the life of peoples, then it must symbolize
  the renewal of the body of a people which has fallen into senility. And in
  the life of peoples senility means internationalism. What is born of senility?
  Nothing, nothing at all. Whatever in human civilization has real value, that
  arose not out of internationalism, it sprang from the soul of a single people.
  When peoples have lost their creative vigor, then they become international
  Everywhere, wherever intellectual incapacity rules in the life of peoples,
  there internationalism appears. And it is no chance that the promoter of
  this cast of thought is a people which itself can boast of no real creative
  force - the Jewish people....So the first of May can be only a glorification of the national creative
  will over against the conception of international disintegration, of the
  liberation of the nation's spirit and of its economic outlook from the infection
  of internationalism. That is in the last resort the question of the restoration
  to health of peoples . . . and the question arises: Is the German oak ever
  destined to see another springtime? And that is where the mission of our
  Movement begins. We have the strength to conquer that which the autumn has
  brought upon us. Our will is to be National Socialists - not national in
  the current sense of the word - not national by halves. We are National Socialist
  fanatics, not dancers on the tight-rope of moderation!There are three words which many use without a thought which for us are no
  catch-phrases: Love, Faith, and Hope. We National Socialists wish to love
  our Fatherland, we wish to learn to love it, to learn to love it jealously,
  to love it alone and to suffer no other idol to stand by its side. We know
  only one interest and that is the interest of our people.We are fanatical in our love for our people, and we are anxious that so-called
  'national governments' should be conscious of that fact. We can go as loyally
  as a dog with those who share our sincerity, but we will pursue with fanatical
  hatred the man who believes that he can play tricks with this love of ours.
  We cannot go with governments who look two ways at once, who squint both
  towards the Right and towards the Left. We are straightforward: it must be
  either love or hate.We have faith in the rights of our people, the rights which have existed
  time out of mind. We protest against the view that every other nation should
  have rights - and we have none. We must learn to make our own this blind
  faith in the rights of our people, in the necessity of devoting ourselves
  to the service of these rights; we must make our own the faith that gradually
  victory must be granted us if only we are fanatical enough. And from this
  love and from this faith there emerges for us the idea of hope. When others
  doubt and hesitate for the future of Germany - we have no doubts. We have
  both the hope and the faith that Germany will and must once more become great
  and mighty.We have both the hope and the faith that the day will come on which Germany
  shall stretch from Koenigsberg to Strassburg, and from Hamburg to Vienna.We have faith that one day Heaven will bring the Germans back into a Reich
  over which there shall be no Soviet star, no Jewish star of David, but above
  that Reich there shall be the symbol of German labor - the Swastika. And
  that will mean that the first of May has truly come.Berlin -- Speech of May 1, 1935BERLINSPEECH OF MAY 1, 1935. . . A WRITER has summed up the impressions made on him by this time in a book which he entitled 'The Decline of the
  West.' Is it then really to be the end of our history and of our peoples? No! we cannot believe it. This age must be
  called, not the decline of the West, but the resurrection of the peoples of this West of ours! Only that which was old,
  decayed and evil perishes; and let it die! But new life will spring up. Faith can be found, if the will is there. Our
  leadership has the will, and faith is with the people....So we have come together on this day to prove symbolically that we are more than a collection of individuals striving
  one against another, that none of us is too proud, none of us too high, none is too rich, and none too poor, to stand
  together before the face of the Lord and of the world in this indissoluble, sworn community. And this united nation,
  we have need of it. When was a leadership at any time faced with a heavier task than our German leadership? Consider, my
  comrades, what our Germany is, and compare it with other countries. What have we? One hundred and thirty-seven people
  to the square kilometer; no colonies; no raw materials; no foreign exchange, no capital, no longer any foreign credits;
  only heavy burdens, sacrifices, taxation, and low wages. What have we, compared with the wealth of other States, the
  wealth of other countries, the wealth of other peoples, with the possibilities of living that they possess? What have we?
  One thing only; we have our people. Either it is everything or it is nothing. On it alone can we count. On it alone can
  we build. Everything that we have created up to the present we owe solely to its goodness of heart, its capacity, its
  loyalty, its decency, its industry, its sense of order. And if I weigh all this in the balance, it seems to me to be
  more than all that the rest of the world can offer us. So this, I believe, can be our message to the other peoples on
  this first of May: 'You need have no fear that we want anything of you. We are proud enough to confess
  that we ourselves own that treasure, which you certainly could not give us - our people.' I could, as leader, think of
  no more glorious, no prouder task in this world than to serve this people. One might give me continents, but I would
  rather be the poorest citizen among this people. And with this people we must and shall succeed in achieving also the
  tasks that are still to come.What we want lies clear before us: not war and not strife. Just as we have established peace within our own people, so
  we want nothing else than peace with the world. For we all know that our great work can succeed only in a time of
  peace. But just as the leadership of the nation in the domestic sphere has never sacrificed its honor in its
  relations with the German people, so it can never surrender the honor of the German people in its dealings with the
  world.We know what we owe to the world. May the world come to understand what she can never deny to a proud people, and
  above all may she comprehend one thing: the Germany of today is not the Germany of yesterday - just as little as the
  Germany of yesterday was the Germany of today. The German people of the present time is not the German people of the
  day before yesterday, but the German people of the two thousand years of German history which lie behind us.Berlin, Reichstag -- Speech of May 4, 1941BERLIN, REICHSTAGSPEECH OF MAY 4, 1941Deputies. Men of the German Reichstag:At a time when only deeds count and words are of little importance, it is
  not my intention to appear before you, the elected representatives of the
  German people, more often than absolutely necessary. The first time I spoke
  to you was at the outbreak of the war when, thanks to the Anglo-French conspiracy
  against peace, every attempt at an understanding with Poland, which otherwise
  would have been possible, had been frustrated.The most unscrupulous men of the present time had, as they admit today, decided
  as early as 1936 to involve the Reich, which in its peaceful work of
  reconstruction was becoming too powerful for them, in a new and bloody war
  and, if possible, to destroy it. They had finally succeeded in finding a
  State that was prepared for their interests and aims, and that State was
  Poland.All my endeavors to come to an understanding with Britain were wrecked by
  the determination of a small clique which, whether from motives of hate or
  for the sake of material gain, rejected every German proposal for an
  understanding due to their resolve, which they never concealed, to resort
  to war, whatever happened.The man behind this fanatical and diabolical plan to bring about war at whatever
  cost was Mr. Churchill. His associates were the men who now form the British
  Govern- ment.These endeavors received most powerful support, both openly and secretly,
  from the so-called great democracies on both sides of the Atlantic. At a
  time when the people were more and more dissatisfied with their deficient
  statesmanship, the responsible men over there believed that a successful
  war would be the most likely means of solving problems that otherwise would
  be beyond their power to solve.Behind these men there stood the great international Jewish financial interests
  that control the banks and the Stock Exchange as well as the armament industry.
  And now, just as before, they scented the opportunity of doing their unsavory
  business. And so, just as before, there was no scruple about sacrificing
  the blood of the peoples. That was the beginning of this war. A few weeks
  later the State that was the third country in Europe, Poland, but had been
  reckless enough to allow herself to be used for the financial interests of
  these warmongers, was annihilated and destroyed.In these circumstances I considered that I owed it to our German people and
  countless men and women in the opposite camps, who as individuals were as
  decent as they were innocent of blame, to make yet another appeal to the
  common sense and the conscience of these statesmen. On October 6, 1939, I
  therefore once more publicly stated that Germany had neither demanded nor
  intended to demand anything either from Britain or from France, that it was
  madness to continue the war and, above all, that the scourge of modern weapons
  of warfare, once they were brought into action, would inevitably ravage vast
  territories.But just as the appeal I made on September 1, 1939, proved to be in vain,
  this renewed appeal met with indignant rejection. The British and their Jewish
  capitalist backers could find no other explanation for this appeal, which
  I had made on humanitarian grounds, than the assumption of weakness on the part
  of Germany.They assured the people of Britain and France that Germany dreaded the clash
  to be expected in the spring of 1940 and was eager to make peace for fear
  of the annihilation that would then inevitably result.Already at that time the Norwegian Government, misled by the stubborn insistence
  of Mr. Churchill's false prophecies, began to toy with the idea of a British
  landing on their soil, thereby contributing to the destruction of Germany
  by permitting their harbors and Swedish iron ore fields to be seized.So sure were Mr. Churchill and Paul Reynaud of the success of their new scheme
  that finally, whether from sheer recklessness or perhaps under the influence
  of drink, they deemed it no longer necessary to make a secret of their
  intentions.It was thanks to these two gentlemen's tendency to gossip that the German
  Government at that time gained cognizance of the plans being made against
  the Reich. A few weeks later this danger to Germany was eliminated. One of
  the boldest deeds of arms in the whole history of warfare frustrated the
  attack of the British and French armies against the right flank of our line
  of defense.Immediately after the failure of these plans, increased pressure was exerted
  by the British warmongers upon Belgium and Holland. Now that the attack upon
  our sources for the supply of iron ore had proved unsuccessful, they aimed
  to advance the front to the Rhine by involving the Belgian and Dutch States
  and thus to threaten and paralyze our production centers for iron and steel.On May 10 of last year perhaps the most memorable struggle in all German
  history commenced. The enemy front was broken up in a few days and the stage
  was then set for the operation that culminated in the greatest battle of
  annihilation in the history of the world. Thus France collapsed, Belgium
  and Holland were already occupied, and the battered remnants of the British
  expeditionary force were driven from the European continent, leaving their
  arms behind.On July 19, 1940, I then convened the German Reichstag for the third time
  in order to render that great account which you all still remember. The meeting
  provided me with the opportunity of expressing the thanks of the nation to
  its soldiers in a form suited to the uniqueness of the event. Once again
  I seized the opportunity of urging the world to make peace. And what I foresaw
  and prophesied at that time happened. My offer of peace was misconstrued
  as a symptom of fear and cowardice.The European and American warmongers succeeded once again in befogging the
  sound common sense of the masses, who can never hope to profit from this
  war, by conjuring up false pictures of new hope. Thus, finally, under pressure
  of public opinion, as formed by their press, they once more managed to induce
  the nation to continue this struggle.Even my warnings against night bombings of the civilian population, as advocated
  by Mr. Churchill, were interpreted as a sign of German impotence. He, the
  most bloodthirsty or amateurish strategist that history has ever known, actually
  saw fit to believe that the reserve displayed for months by the German Air
  Force could be looked upon only as proof of their incapacity to fly by night.So this man for months ordered his paid scribblers to deceive the British
  people into believing that the Royal Air Force alone - and no others - was
  in a position to wage war in this way, and that thus ways and means had been
  found to force the Reich to its knees by the ruthless onslaught of the British
  Air Force on the German civilian population in conjunction with the starvation
  blockade.Again and again I uttered these warnings against this specific type of aerial
  warfare, and I did so for over three and a half months. That these warnings
  failed to impress Mr. Churchill does not surprise me in the least. For what
  does this man care for the lives of others? What does he care for culture
  or for architecture? When war broke out he stated clearly that he wanted
  to have his war, even though the cities of England might be reduced to ruins.
  So now he has got his war.My assurances that from a given moment every one of his bombs would be returned
  if necessary a hundredfold failed to induce this man to consider even for
  an instant the criminal nature of his action. He professes not to be in the
  least depressed and he even assures us that the British people, too, after
  such bombing raids, greeted him with a joyous serenity, causing him to return
  to London refreshed by his visits to the stricken areas.It is possible that this sight strengthened Mr. Churchill in his firm
  determination to continue the war in this way, and we are no less determined
  to continue to retaliate, if necessary, a hundred bombs for every one of
  his and to go on doing so until the British nation at last gets rid of this
  criminal and his methods.The appeal to forsake me, made to the German nation by this fool and his
  satellites on May Day, of all days, are only to be explained either as
  symptomatic of a paralytic disease or of a drunkard's ravings. His abnormal
  state of mind also gave birth to a decision to transform the Balkans into
  a theater of war.For over five years this man has been chasing around Europe like a madman
  in search of something that he could set on fire. Unfortunately, he again
  and again finds hirelings who open the gates of their country to this
  international incendiary.After he had succeeded in the course of the past winter in persuading the
  British people by a wave of false assertions and pretensions that the German
  Reich, exhausted by the campaign in the preceding months, was completely
  spent, he saw himself obliged, in order to prevent an awakening of the truth,
  to create a fresh conflagration in Europe.In so doing he returned to the project that had been in his mind as early
  as the autumn of 1939 and the spring of 1940. It was thought possible at
  the time to mobilize about 100 divisions in Britain's interest.The sudden collapse which we witnessed in May and June of the past year forced
  these plans to be abandoned for the moment. But by the autumn of last year
  Mr. Churchill began to tackle this problem once again.In the meantime, however, certain difficulties had arisen. As a result, Rumania,
  owing to internal changes, dropped out of England's political scheme.In dealing with these conditions, I shall begin by giving you a brief outline
  of the aims of Germany's policy in the Balkans. As in the past, the Reich
  never pursued any territorial or any other selfish political interest in
  the Balkans. In other words, the Reich has never taken the slightest interest
  in territorial problems and internal conditions in these States for any selfish
  reason whatsoever.On the other hand, the Reich has always endeavored to build up and to strengthen
  close economic ties with these States in particular. This, however, not only
  served the interests of the Reich but equally the interests of these countries
  themselves.If any two national economic systems ever effectively complemented one another,
  that is especially the case regarding the Balkan States and Germany. Germany
  is an industrial country and requires foodstuffs and raw materials. The Balkan
  States are agrarian countries and are short of these raw materials. At the
  same time, they require industrial products.It was therefore hardly surprising when Germany thus became the main business
  partner of the Balkan States. Nor was this in Germany's interest alone, but
  also in that of the Balkan peoples themselves.AND NONE BUT OUR JEW-RIDDEN DEMOCRACIES, WHICH CAN THINK ONLY IN TERMS OF
  CAPITALISM, CAN MAINTAIN THAT IF ONE STATE DELIVERS MACHINERY TO ANOTHER
  STATE IT THEREBY DOMINATES THAT OTHER STATE. IN ACTUAL FACT SUCH DOMINATION,
  IF IT OCCURS, CAN BE ONLY A RECIPROCAL DOMINATION.It is presumably easier to be without machinery than without food and raw
  materials. Consequently, the partner in need of raw material and foodstuffs
  would appear to be more tied down than the recipient of industrial products.
  IN THIS TRANSACTION THERE WAS NEITHER CONQUEROR NOR CONQUERED. THERE WERE
  ONLY PARTNERS.The German Reich of the National Socialist revolution has prided itself on
  being a fair and decent partner, offering in exchange high-quality products
  instead of worthless democratic paper money. For these reasons the Reich
  was interested in only one thing if, indeed, there was any question of political
  interest, namely, in seeing that internally the business partner was firmly
  established on a sound and healthy basis.THE APPLICATION OF THIS IDEA LED IN FACT NOT ONLY TO INCREASING PROSPERITY
  IN THESE COUNTRIES BUT ALSO TO THE BEGINNING OF MUTUAL CONFIDENCE. All the
  greater, however, became the endeavor of that world incendiary, Churchill,
  to put an end to this peaceful development and by shamelessly imposing upon
  these States utterly worthless British guarantees and promises of assistance
  to introduce into this peaceable European territory elements of unrest,
  uncertainty, distrust and, finally, conflict.Originally, Rumania was first won over by these guarantees and later, of
  course, Greece. It has, meanwhile, probably been sufficiently demonstrated
  that he had absolutely no power of any kind to provide real help and that
  these guarantees were merely intended to rope these States in to follow the
  dangerous trend of filthy British politics.RUMANIA HAS HAD TO PAY BITTERLY FOR THE GUARANTEES, WHICH WERE CALCULATED
  TO ESTRANGE HER FROM THE AXIS POWERS.Greece, which least of all required such a guarantee, was offered her share
  to link her destiny to that of the country that provided her King with cash
  and orders.EVEN TODAY I FEEL THAT I MUST, AS I BELIEVE IN THE INTEREST OF HISTORICAL
  ACCURACY, DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE GREEK PEOPLE AND THAT THIN TOP LAYER OF
  CORRUPT LEADERS WHO, INSPIRED BY A KING WHO HAD NO EYES FOR THE DUTY OF TRUE
  LEADERSHIP, PREFERRED INSTEAD TO FURTHER THE AIMS OF BRITISH WAR POLITICS.
  To me this is a subject of profound regret.Germany, with the faint hope of still being able to contribute in some way
  to a solution of the problem, had not severed relations with Greece. But
  even then I was bound in duty to point out before the whole world that we
  would not tacitly allow a revival of the old Salonika scheme of the Great
  War.Unfortunately, my warning was not taken seriously enough. That we were
  determined, if the British tried to gain another foothold in Europe, to drive
  them back into the sea was not taken seriously enough.The result was that the British began in an increasing degree to establish
  bases for the formation of a new Salonika army. They began by laying out
  airdromes and by establishing the necessary ground organization in the firm
  conviction that the occupation of the airdromes themselves could afterward
  be carried out very speedily.Finally a continuous stream of transports brought equipment for an army which,
  according to Mr. Churchill's idea and plans, was to be landed in Greece.
  As I have said, already we were aware of this. For months we watched this
  entire strange procedure with attention, if with restraint.The reverses suffered by the Italian Army in North Africa, owing to a certain
  material inferiority of their tanks and anti-tank guns, finally led Mr. Churchill
  to believe that the time was ripe to transfer the theater of war from Libya
  to Greece. He ordered the transport of the remaining tanks and of the infantry
  division, composed mainly of Anzacs, and was convinced that he could now
  complete his scheme, which was to set the Balkans aflame.THUS DID MR. CHURCHILL COMMIT ONE OF THE GREATEST STRATEGIC BLUNDERS OF THIS
  WAR. As soon as there could be no further doubt regarding Britain's intentions
  of gaining a foothold in the Balkans, I took the necessary steps.Germany, by keeping pace with these moves, assembled the necessary forces
  for the purpose of counteracting any possible tricks of that gentleman. In
  this connection I must state categorically that this action was not directed
  against Greece.The Duce did not even request me to place one single German division at his
  disposal for this purpose. He was convinced that with the advent of good
  weather his stand against Greece would have been brought to a successful
  conclusion. I was of the same opinion.The concentration of German forces was therefore not made for the purpose
  of assisting the Italians against Greece. It was a precautionary measure
  against the British attempt under cover of the clamor caused by the Italo-Greek
  war to intrench themselves secretly in the Balkans in order to force the
  issue from that quarter on the model of the Salonika army during the World
  War, and, above all, to draw other elements into the whirlpool.This hope was founded principally on two States, namely, Turkey and Yugoslavia.
  But with these very States I have striven during the years since I came into
  power to establish close co-operation.The World War actually started from Belgrade. Nevertheless, the German people,
  who are by nature so ready to forgive and forget, felt no animosity toward
  that country. Turkey was our ally in the World War. The unfortunate outcome
  of that struggle weighed upon that country just as heavily as it did upon
  us.The great genius who created the new Turkey was the first to set a wonderful
  example of recovery to our allies whom fortune had at that time deserted
  and whom fate had dealt so terrible a blow. Whereas Turkey, thanks to the
  practical attitude of her leaders, preserved her independence in carrying
  out her own resolutions, Yugolsavia fell a victim to British intrigue.Most of you, especially my old Party comrades among you, know what efforts
  I have made to establish a straightforward understanding and indeed friendly
  relations between Germany and Yugoslavia. In pursuance of this aim Herr von
  Ribbentrop, our Minister of Foreign Affairs, submitted to the Yugoslav Government
  proposals that were so outstanding and so fair that at least even the Yugoslav
  State of that time seemed to become increasingly eager for such close
  co-operation.Germany had no intention of starting a war in the Balkans. On the contrary,
  it was our honest intention as far as possible to contribute to a settlement
  of the conflict with Greece by means that would be tolerable to the legitimate
  wishes of Italy.The Duce not only consented to but lent his full support to our efforts to
  bring Yugoslavia into a close community of interests with our peace aims.
  Thus it finally became possible to induce the Yugoslav Government to join
  the Threepower Pact, which made no demands whatever on Yugoslavia but only
  offered that country advantages.Thus on March 26 of this year a pact was signed in Vienna that offered the
  Yugoslav State the greatest future conceivable and could have assured peace
  for the Balkans. Believe me, gentlemen, on that day I left the beautiful
  city of the Danube truly happy not only because it seemed as though almost
  eight years of foreign policies had received their reward but also because
  I believed that perhaps at the last moment German intervention in the Balkans
  might not be necessary.We were all stunned by the news of that coup, carried through by a handful
  of bribed conspirators who had brought about the event that caused the British
  Prime Minister to declare in joyous words that at last he had something good
  to report.YOU WILL SURELY UNDERSTAND, GENTLEMEN, THAT WHEN I HEARD THIS I AT ONCE GAVE
  ORDERS TO ATTACK YUGOSLAVIA. To treat the, German Reich in this way is
  impossible. One cannot spent years in concluding a treaty that is in the
  interest of the other party merely to discover that this treaty has not only
  been broken overnight but also that it has been answered by the insulting
  of the representative of the German Reich, by the threatening of his military
  attache, by the injuring of the aide de camp of this attache, by the maltreating
  of numerous other Germans, by demolishing property, by laying waste the homes
  of German citizens and by terrorizing.GOD KNOWS THAT I WANTED PEACE. But I can do nothing but protect the interests
  of the Reich with those means which, thank God, are at our disposal. I made
  my decision at that moment all the more calmly because I knew that I was
  in accord with Bulgaria, who had always remained unshaken in her loyalty
  to the German Reich, and with the equally justified indignation of Hungary.Both of our old allies in the World War were bound to regard this action
  as a provocation emanating from the State that once before had set the whole
  of Europe on fire and had been guilty of the indescribable sufferings that
  befell Germany, Hungary, and Bulgaria in consequence.The general directions of operations issued by me through the Supreme Command
  of the German forces on March 27 confronted the Army and the Air Force with
  a formidable task. By a mere turn of the hand an additional campaign had
  to be prepared. Units that had already arrived had to be moved about. Supplies
  of armaments had to be assured and the air force had to take over numerous
  improvised airports part of which were still under water.WITHOUT THE SYMPATHETIC ASSISTANCE OF HUNGARY AND THE EXTREMELY LOYAL ATTITUDE
  OF RUMANIA IT WOULD HAVE BEEN VERY DIFFICULT TO CARRY OUT MY ORDERS IN THE
  SHORT TIME ENVISAGED.I fixed April 6 as the day on which the attack was to begin. The main plan
  of operation was: First, to proceed with an army coming from Bulgaria against
  Thrace in Greece in the direction of the Aegean Sea.The main striking strength of this army lay in its right wing, which was
  to force a passage through to Salonika by using mountain divisions and a
  division of tanks; second, to thrust forward with a second army with the
  object of establishing connection as speedily as possible with the Italian
  forces advancing from Albania. These two operations were to begin on April
  6.Third, a further operation, beginning on the eighth, provided for the
  break-through of an army from Bulgaria with the object of reaching the
  neighborhood of Belgrade. In conjunction with this, a German army corps was
  to occupy the Banat on the tenth.In connection with these operations general agreement had been made with
  our allies, Italy and Hungary. Agreements as to co-operation had also been
  reached between the two air forces. The command of the German Armies operating
  against Macedonia and Greece was placed in the hands of Field Marshal von
  List, who had already particularly distinguished himself in the previous
  campaigns. Once more and under the most exacting conditions he carried out
  the task confronting him in truly superior fashion.The forces advancing against Yugoslavia from the southwest and from Hungary
  were commanded by Col. Gen. von Weick. He, too, in a very short time with
  the forces under his command reached his objective.The Army and SS detachments operating under Field Marshal von Brauchitsch,
  as Commander in Chief, and the Chief of the General Staff, Col. Gen. Halder,
  forced the Greek Army in Thrace to capitulate after only five days, established
  contact with the Italian forces advancing from Albania, occupied Salonika,
  and thus generally prepared the way for the difficult and glorious break-through
  via Larissa to Athens.These operations were crowned by the occupation of the Peloponnesus and numerous
  Greek islands. A detailed appreciation of the achievements will be given
  by the German High Command.The Air Force under the personal command of Reich Marshal Goering was divided
  into two main groups, commanded by Col. Gen. Loehr and General von Richthofen.
  It was their task, first, to shatter the enemy air force and to smash its
  ground organization; second, to attack every important military objective
  in the conspirators' headquarters at Belgrade, thus eliminating it from the
  very outset; third, by every manner of active co-operation everywhere with
  the fighting German troops to break the enemy's resistance, to impede the
  enemy's flight, to prevent as far as possible his embarkation.The German armed forces have truly surpassed themselves in this campaign.
  There is only one way of characterizing that campaign:Nothing is impossible for the German soldier. Historical justice, however,
  obliges me to say that of the opponents that have taken up arms against us,
  MOST PARTICULARLY THE GREEK SOLDIERS, HAVE FOUGHT WITH THE GREATEST BRAVERY
  AND CONTEMPT OF DEATH. They only capitulated when further resistance became
  impossible and therefore useless.But I am now compelled to speak of the enemy who is the main cause of this
  conflict. As a German and as a soldier I consider it unworthy ever to revile
  a fallen enemy. But it seems to me to be necessary to defend the truth from
  the wild exaggerations of a man who as a soldier is a bad politician and
  as a politician is an equally bad soldier.Mr. Churchill, who started this struggle, is endeavoring, as with regard
  to Norway or Dunkerque, to say something that sooner or later might perhaps
  he twisted around to resemble success. I do not consider that honorable but
  in his case it is understandable.The gift Mr. Churchill possesses is the gift to lie with a pious expression
  on his face and to distort the truth until finally glorious victories are
  made out of the most terrible defeats.A British Army of 60,000 to 70,000 men landed in Greece. Before the catastrophe
  the same man maintained, moreover, that it consisted of 240,000 men. The
  object of this army was to attack Germany from the south, inflict a defeat
  upon her, and from this point as in 1918 turn the tide of the war.I prophesied more correctly than Mr. Churchill in my last speech, in which
  I announced that wherever the British might set foot on the Continent they
  would be attacked by us and driven into the sea.Now, with his brazen effrontery, he asserts that this war has cost us 75,000
  lives. He causes his presumably not overintelligent fellow-countrymen to
  be informed by one of his paid creatures that the British, after having slain
  enormous masses of Germans, finally turned away from sheer abhorrence of
  the slaughter and, strictly speaking, withdrew for this reason alone.I will now present to you the results of this campaign in a few short figures.
  In the course of the operations against Yugoslavia there were the following
  numbers of purely Serbian prisoners, leaving out soldiers of German origin
  and some other groups, 6,198 officers, 313,864 men.The number of Greek prisoners, 8,000 officers and 210,000 men, has not the
  same significance. The number of Englishmen, New Zealanders and Australians
  taken prisoner exceeds 9,000 officers and men.The German share of the booty alone, according to the estimates at present
  available, amounts to more than half a million rifles, far more than 1,000
  guns, many thousand machine-guns and anti-aircraft machine-guns, vehicles,
  and large amounts of ammunition . . . .The losses of the German Army and the German Air Force as well as those of
  the SS troops in this campaign are the smallest that we have ever suffered
  so far. The German armed forces have in fighting against Yugoslavia and Greece
  as well as against the British in Greece lost:Army and SS Troops - Fifty-seven officers and 1,042 noncommissioned officers
  and men killed, 181 officers and 3,571 noncommissioned officers and men wounded,
  and 13 officers and 372 noncommissioned officers and men missing.Air Force - Ten officers and 42 noncommissioned officers and men killed and
  36 officers and 104 noncommissioned officers and men missing.Once more I can only repeat that we feel the hardship of the sacrifice borne
  by the families concerned. The entire German nation expresses to them its
  heartfelt gratitude.Taking the measures as a whole, however, the losses suffered are so small
  that they constitute supreme justification, first, for the planning and timing
  of this campaign; second for the conduct of operations; third, for the manner
  in which they were carried through.The training of our officers is excellent beyond comparison The high standard
  of efficiency of our soldiers, the superiority of our equipment, the quality
  of our munitions and the indomitable courage of all ranks have combined to
  lead at such small sacrifice to a success of truly decisive historical
  importance.Churchill, one of the most hopeless dabblers in.strategy, thus managed to
  lose two theaters of war at one single blow. The fact that this man, who
  in any other country would be court-martialed, gained fresh admiration as
  Prime Minister cannot be construed as an expression of magnanimity such as
  was accorded by Roman senators to generals honorably defeated in battle.
  It is merely proof of that perpetual blindness with which the gods afflict
  those whom they are about to destroy.The consequences of this campaign are extraordinary. In view of the fact
  that a small set of conspirators in Belgrade again were able to foment trouble
  in the service of extracontinental interests, the radical elimination of
  this danger means the removal of an element of tension for the whole of Europe.The Danube as an important waterway is thus safeguarded against any further
  act of sabotage. Traffic has been resumed in full.Apart from the modest correction of its frontiers, which were infringed as
  a result of the outcome of the World War, the Reich has no special territorial
  interests in these parts. As far as politics are concerned we are merely
  interested in safeguarding peace in this region, while in the realm of economics
  we wish to see an order that will allow the production of goods to be developed
  and the exchange of products to be resumed in the interests of all.It is, however, only in accordance with supreme justice if those interests
  are also taken into account that are founded upon ethnographical, historical,
  or economic conditions.I can assure you that I look into the future with perfect tranquillity and
  great confidence. The German Reich and its allies represent power, military,
  economic and, above all, in moral respects, which is superior to any possible
  coalition in the world. The German armed forces will always do their part
  whenever it may be necessary. The confidence of the German people will always
  accompany their soldiers.Berlin, Congress of the German Work Front -- Speech of May 10, 1933BERLIN, CONGRESS OF THE GERMAN WORK FRONTSPEECH OF MAY 10, 1933. . . AMIDST all the crises under which we suffer and which do but present a single connected picture, perhaps that
  which the people feels most acutely is the economic crisis. The political crisis, the moral crisis, are only very rarely
  felt by the individual. The average man sees in the experiences of his day not that which affects the community
  as a whole but for the most part only that which strikes himself. Therefore the present has only very rarely any
  consciousness of political or moral collapse, so long as this collapse does not extend in one way or another into
  economic life. For when this happens it is no longer a question of some abstract problem that can perhaps be
  observed or studied in its effect on others, but one day the individual himself will be caught hold of by this question,
  and the more intimately such a crisis begins to influence his own life, the more clearly does he come to recognize
  that existing conditions cannot remain as they are. Then all of a sudden people talk of economic distress, of economic
  misery, and then, starting from this distress, one can awaken an understanding for that other distress which
  otherwise is wont to remain for a long time hidden from the individual man.It is not enough to say that the German economic distress is a phenomenon resulting from a world crisis, from a
  general economic distress, since, of course, exactly in the same way every other people could plead the same excuse,
  could adduce the same reason. It is clear that even so this distress cannot have its roots all over the world, those
  roots must always be found within the life of peoples. And though only one thing is probably true - that these roots
  are perhaps the same in the case of many peoples - yet one cannot hope to master this distress by the mere statement
  that the presence of a certain distress is a feature of the age; rather it is clearly a necessity to disclose these
  roots in the internal life of a single people and to cure the distress there where one can really effect a cure.Unfortunately it is precisely the German who is only too inclined at such times, instead of looking at his own
  internal life, to let his gaze range into the far distance. Our people has been so long falsely taught to think in
  international terms that even in such a distress as the present it tends to treat this problem, too, from
  international points of view. And the result is that many of us simply cannot believe that perhaps it might be possible
  to remedy such a misfortune in some other way than by international methods. And yet that is an error. It is
  natural that international infirmities which afflict all peoples in one way or another must be removed by the peoples
  who suffer from them, but that in no way alters the fact that every people must wage this battle on its own behalf,
  and above all that no single people can be liberated from this distress by international methods if it does not for
  its own part take the necessary measures. These measures can, of course, find their place within the framework of
  international measures, but one's own action must not be made dependent upon the action of others.The crisis in German economics is not merely a crisis which is expressed by our economic statistics, but it is above all
  a crisis which can also be traced in the internal course of our economic life, in the character of its organization,
  etc. And here we can indeed speak of a crisis which has hit our people more severely than other peoples. It is the
  crisis which we see in the relations between capital, economics, and people. This crisis is particularly obvious
  in the relations between our workmen and the employers. Here the crisis has been more acute than in any other country in
  the world....The first cause lies in the alteration in the form of business organization which determined the character of our
  economics. That cause may be traced throughout the world precisely as in Germany....The gradual alienation of classes which we in Germany experienced led to the appearance on the one side of the
  special interests of the employers and on the other side the special interests of the employed. This was the beginning of
  our unhappy economic development. When one had once started on this road, of necessity the two sides became ever more
  widely separated. Here a law governs human affairs: when one has once chosen the wrong road this road always leads one
  further from reason.On the contrary, the road led necessarily to further alienation and this tendency, as I said, was favored by the
  depersonalization of property. And I might almost say that this process was apparently still further encouraged and
  strengthened on scientific grounds. There gradually arose an ideology which believed that it could permanently support
  the conception of property even though those who derived any practical profit from the conception no longer represented
  more than a minimal percentage of the nation. And on the other hand there arose the view that, since there was now
  only so small a percentage of those who enjoyed property, the conception of private property as such should be
  abandoned....When one has once started on this course, then logically the employers will in turn form their organization. And as a
  matter of course these two organizations will not pursue their own ends in mutual toleration, but they will maintain
  their apparently separate interests with those weapons which are given them: viz, lockouts and strikes. In this warfare
  sometimes one and sometimes the other side will conquer. But in either case it is the whole nation which will have to pay
  the cost of this warfare and suffer the damage. And the final result of this development is that these organizations
  as they build themselves up, considering the passion of the German for bureaucratization, will continuously become
  more unwieldy and their personnel will grow constantly larger. And at length the organization will no longer serve
  the interests of its creators, but these will be subservient to the organization, so that the warfare is continued in
  order that the existence of the organization may be justified, even though at times reason suddenly comes and
  says; 'The whole affair is madness; the gain when compared with the sacrifices is positively ludicrous. If you reckon
  up the sacrifices which we make for the organization they are far greater than any possible profit.' Then the
  organizations in their turn will have to prove how necessary they are by stirring up the parties to fight each other. And
  then it may even be that the two organizations come to an understanding, when once they have realized the situation.The second reason is the rise of Marxism. Marxism, as a conception of the world with disintegration for its aim, saw
  with keen insight that the trade-union movement offered it the possibility in the future of conducting its attack
  against the State and against human society with an absolutely annihilating weapon. Not with any idea of helping
  the worker -what is the worker of any country to these apostles of internationalism? Nothing at all! They never see
  him! They themselves are no workers: they are alien litterateurs, an alien gang! . . .One had to inoculate the trade union with the idea: You are an instrument of the class war and that war in the last
  resort can find its political leaders only in Marxism. What is then more comprehensible than that one should also pay
  one's tribute to the leadership? And the tribute was exacted in full measure. These gentlemen have not been content with
  a tithe: they demanded a considerably higher rate of interest.This class war leads to the proclamation of the trade union as simply an instrument for the representation of the
  economic interests of the working classes and therewith for the purposes of the general strike. Thus the general strike
  appears for the first time as a means for exercising political power and shows what Marxism really hoped to gain
  from this weapon - not a means for the salvation of the worker, but on the contrary only an instrument of war for
  the destruction of the State which opposed Marxism. To prove to what lengths this whole madness could go we Germans have
  an unprecedented example, as frightful as it is instructive, in the War.We can add only one remark: Had the German trade unions been in our hands during the War, if they had been in my
  hands and had they been trained with the same false end in view as was in fact the case, then we National Socialists
  would have placed the whole of this gigantic organization at the service of the Fatherland. We should have declared: We
  recognize, of course, the sacrifices entailed; we are ready ourselves to make those sacrifices; we do not wish to
  escape, we want to fight with you on the same terms; we give our destiny and our life into the hand of Almighty
  Providence just as the others must do. That we should have done as a matter of course. For, German workmen, we should
  have said, you must realize: It is not the fate of the German State which is now to be decided, not of the Empire
  as a constitutional form, not of the monarchy; it is not a question of capitalism or militarism; it is the existence of
  our people which is at stake and we German workmen make up seventy per cent of this people. It is our fate which is to
  be decided!That is what should have been known then, and it could have been known. We should have known it....It was a crime that this was not done. It was not done because it would have violated the inner meaning of Marxism,
  for Marxism wanted only the destruction of Germany. . . . For since the days of November, 1918, millions of Germans
  have held the view that it was the fault of the German workingman which caused the country's collapse. He who
  himself had made such unspeakable sacrifices, he who had filled our regiments with the millions of their riflemen -
  he as a class was suddenly made collectively liable for the act of the perjured, lying, degenerate destroyers of the
  Fatherland. That was the worst that could have happened, for at that moment for many millions in Germany the community of
  the people was shattered....The third cause of this fatal development lay in the State itself. There might have been something which could perhaps
  have opposed these millions and that something would have been the State, had it not been that this State had sunk so
  low that it had become the plaything of groups of interested parties. It is no mere chance that this whole development
  runs parallel with the democratization of our public life. This democratization tended to bring the State directly into
  the hands of certain strata of society which identified themselves with property as such, with big business as such.
  The masses increasingly got the impression that the State itself was no objective institution standing above parties,
  that in particular it was no longer the incorporation of any objective authority, but that it was itself the mouthpiece
  of the economic will and of the economic interests of certain groups within the nation, and that even the
  leadership of the State justified such an assumption. The victory of the political bourgeoisie was nothing else than
  the victory of a stratum of society which had arisen as the result of economic laws....While it is natural that amongst soldiers he only can be a leader who has been trained for that post, it was by no
  means a matter of course that only he should be a political leader who had been trained in that sphere and had besides
  proved his capacity; gradually the view gained ground that membership of a certain class which had arisen as the result
  of economic laws carried with it the capacity to govern a people. We have come to realize the consequences of this
  error. The stratum of society which claimed for itself the leadership has failed us in every hour of crisis and in the
  nation's hour of supreme difficulty it collapsed miserably.... Let no one say to me: 'No other course was possible.'
  It was only for these leaders that no other course was possible....We must penetrate to the inner causes of the collapse with the resolution that these inner causes shall be removed. I
  believe that immediately we must begin at the point where in the last resort a beginning must today be made - we must
  begin with the State itself. A NEW AUTHORITY MUST BE SET UP, AND THIS AUTHORITY MUST BE INDEPENDENT OF MOMENTARY CURRENTS
  OF CONTEMPORARY OPINION, ESPECIALLY OF THOSE CURRENTS WHICH FLOW FROM A NARROW AND LIMITED ECONOMIC EGOISM. THERE MUST
  BE CONSTITUTED A LEADERSHIP OF THE STATE WHICH REPRESENTS A REAL AUTHORITY, an authority independent of any one stratum
  of society. A leadership must arise in which every citizen can have confidence, assured that its sole aim is the
  happiness, the welfare, of the German people, a leadership which can with justice say of itself that it is on every
  side completely independent. People have talked so much of the past Age of Absolutism, of the absolutism of Frederick
  the Great, and of the Age of Popular Democracy, our Parliamentary Epoch. Regarded from the standpoint of the
  people the earlier period was the more objective: it could really more objectively safeguard the interests of the
  nation, while the later period continuously descended more and more to the representation merely of the interests of
  individual classes.Nothing can prove that more clearly than the mere conception of a class war - the slogan that the rule of the
  bourgeoisie must be replaced by the rule of the proletariat. That means that the whole question becomes one of a change
  in a class dictatorship, while our aim is the dictatorship of the people, i.e., the dictatorship of the whole people,
  the community.And further it is essential that one should sweep away all those forces which consciously abuse human weaknesses in
  order with their help to carry into execution their deadly schemes. When fourteen or fifteen years ago and over and
  over again since then I declared before the German nation that I saw my task before the bar of German history to lie
  in the destruction of Marxism, that was for me no empty phrase, that was a sacred oath which I will keep so long as
  I draw breath. This confession of faith, the confession of faith of an individual, through my effort has become the
  confession of faith of a mighty organization....We must accordingly wage our battle without any compromise whatsoever against the force which has eaten at the heart of
  our German people during the last seventeen years, which has inflicted on us such fearful injuries and which, if it had
  not been conquered, would have destroyed Germany. Bismarck once declared that liberalism was the pacemaker for social
  democracy. And I do not need in this place to say that social democracy is the pacemaker for communism. But
  communism is the pacemaker for death - the death of a people - downfall. WE HAVE BEGUN THE FIGHT AGAINST COMMUNISM AND
  WE SHALL WAGE IT TO THE END. As so often in German history, it will once more be proved that the greater the distress,
  the greater is the power of the German people to find its way upwards and forwards. This time, too, it will find the
  way; indeed, I am convinced that it has already found it.Thus the unification of the German Workmen's Movement has a great moral significance. When we complete the
  reconstruction of the State which must be the result of very great concessions on both sides, we want to have two parties
  to the contract facing each other who both are in their hearts on principle nationally minded, who both look only to
  their people, and who both on principle are ready to subordinate everything else in order to serve the common
  weal. Only if that is possible from the first can I believe in the success of our efforts. It is the spirit from which
  efforts spring that helps to decide the issue. There must be no conquerors and no conquered; our people must be the only
  conqueror - conqueror over classes and castes, and conqueror over the interests of these single groups in our people! And
  thereby we shall come naturally to a nobler conception of work.... But the Movement which I and my fellow-fighters
  represent will, nothing daunted, exalt the word 'Worker' till it becomes the great title of honor of the German
  nation....Personally, I am against all honorary titles, and I do not think that anyone has much to accuse me of on this score.
  What is not absolutely necessary for me to do, that I do not do. I should never care to have visiting cards printed with
  the titles which in this earthly world of ours are given with such ceremony. I do not want anything on my gravestone
  but my name. All the same, owing to the peculiar circumstances of my life, I am perhaps more capable than
  anyone else of understanding and realizing the nature and the whole life of the various German castes. Not because I
  have been able to look down on this life from above but because I have participated in it, because I stood in the
  midst of this life, because fate in a moment of caprice or perhaps fulfilling the designs of Providence, cast me into
  the great mass of the people, amongst common folk. Because I myself was a laboring man for years in the building trade
  and had to earn my own bread. And because for a second time I took my place once again as an ordinary soldier amongst
  the masses and because then life raised me into other strata of our people so that I know these, too, better than
  countless others who were born in these strata. So fate has perhaps fitted me more than any other to be the broker - I
  think I may say - the honest broker for both sides alike. Here I am not personally interested; I am not dependent upon
  the State or on any public office; I am not dependent upon business or industry or any trade union. I am an independent
  man, and I have set before myself no other goal than to serve, to the best of my power and ability, the German
  people, and above all to serve the millions who, thanks to their simple trust and ignorance and thanks to the baseness
  of their former leaders, have perhaps suffered more than any other class.I have always professed that there is nothing finer than to be the advocate of those who cannot easily defend
  themselves. I know the masses of my people, and there is only one thing which I should always wish to say to our
  intellectuals: Every Reich that is founded only on the classes which represent intellect and intelligence has weak
  foundations. I know this intellect, always so subtle, always inquiring, but also always uncertain, always hesitating,
  vacillating from side to side - never steadfast! He who would construct a Reich on these intellectual classes alone
  will find his building insecure. It is no chance that religions are more stable than constitutional forms.
  Generally they tend to sink their roots deeper into the soil; they would be unthinkable in the absence of the masses
  of the people. I know that the intellectual classes fall all too easily a victim to that arrogance which measures the
  people according to the standards of its knowledge and of its so-called intelligence; and yet there are things in the
  people which very often the intelligence of the 'intelligent' does not see because it cannot see them. The
  masses are certainly often dull, in many respects they are certainly backward, they are not so nimble, so witty, or
  intellectual; but they have something to their credit - they have loyalty, constancy, stability....Because I know this people better than any other, and at the same time know the rest of the people, I am not only
  ready in this case to undertake the role of an honest broker but I am glad that destiny can cast me for the part. I shall
  never in my life have any greater reason for pride than when at the end of my days I can say: I have won the German
  workingman for the German Reich.Munich -- Speech of July 28, 1922MUNICHSPEECH OF JULY 28, 1922. . . IT IS a battle which began nearly 120 years ago, at the moment when the Jew was granted citizen rights in the
  European States. The political emancipation of the Jews was the beginning of an attack of delirium. For thereby they
  were given full citizen rights and equality to a people which was much more clearly and definitely a race apart than
  all others, that has always formed and will form a State within the State. That did not happen perhaps at one blow,
  but it came about as things come about today and always do come about: first a little finger, then a second and a
  third, and so bit by bit until at last a people that in the eighteenth century still appeared completely alien had won
  equal citizen-rights with ourselves.And it was precisely the same in the economic sphere. The vast process of the industrialization of the peoples meant
  the confluence of great masses of workmen in the towns. Thus great hordes of people arose, and these, more's the pity,
  were not properly dealt with by those whose moral duty it was to concern themselves for their welfare. Parallel with
  this was a gradual 'moneyfication' of the whole of the nation's labor-strength. 'Share-capital' was in the
  ascendant, and thus bit by bit the Stock Exchange came to control the whole national economy.The directors of these institutions were, and are without exception, Jews. I say 'without exception,' for the few non-Jews
  who had a share in them are in the last resort nothing but screens, shop-window Christians, whom one needs in order, for
  the sake of the masses, to keep up the appearance that these institutions were after all founded as a natural outcome of
  the needs and the economic life of all peoples alike, and were not, as was the fact, institutions which correspond only
  with the essential characteristics of the Jewish people and are the outcome of those characteristics.Then Europe stood at the parting of the ways. Europe began to divide into two halves, into West Europe and Central and
  Eastern Europe. At first Western Europe took the lead in the process of industrialization. Especially in England crowds
  of farm laborers, sons of farmers, or even ruined farmers themselves, streamed into the towns and there formed a new
  fourth estate.But here one fact is of more importance than we are accustomed to admit: this England, like France, had
  relatively few Jews. And the consequence of that was that the great masses, concentrated in the towns, did not come
  into immediate contact with this alien nation, and thus feelings of aversion which must otherwise necessarily have
  arisen did not find sufficient nourishment for their development. In the end the fifty or sixty thousand Jews in
  England - there was hardly that number in England then - with supreme ease were able so to 'Europeanize' themselves
  that they remained hidden from the primitive eye of the ordinary member of the public and as 'Captains of Industry,'
  and especially as representatives of capital on a large scale, they could appear no longer as foreigners but
  themselves became Englishmen.This accounts for the fact that anti-Semitism in these States could never attain to any
  native vigor; for the same is true of France. And precisely for this reason in these countries it was possible to
  introduce the system which we have to represent to ourselves under the concept of 'Democracy.' There it was possible to
  create a State-form whose meaning could only be the mastery of the herd over the intelligentsia, the mastery over true
  energy through the dead weight of massed numbers. In other words: it must be supremely easy for the Jewish
  intelligentsia, small in numbers and therefore completely hidden in the body of the British people, so to work upon
  the masses that the latter, quite unconscious of whom they were obeying, in the end did but serve the purposes of this
  small stratum of society.Through the press propaganda, through the use of the organs of information, it was
  possible in England to found the great model parties. Already in those early days they saw to it shrewdly that
  here were always two or three groups apparently hostile to each other, but in fact all hanging on a gold thread, the
  whole designed to take account of a human characteristic - that the longer a man possesses an object, the more readily
  he grows tired of it. He craves something new: therefore one needs two parties. The one is in office, the other in
  opposition. When the one has played itself out, then the opposition party comes into power, and the party which has
  had its day is now in its turn the opposition. After twenty years the new party itself has once more played itself out
  and the game begins afresh. In truth this is a highly ingenious mill in which the interests of a nation are ground
  very small. As everyone knows, this system is given some such name as 'Self-Government of a People.'Besides this we always find two great catchwords, 'Freedom' and 'Democracy,' used, I might say, as signboards.
  'Freedom': under that term is understood, at least amongst those in authority who in fact carry on the Government, the
  possibility of an unchecked plundering of the masses of the people to which no resistance can be offered. The masses
  themselves naturally believe that under the term 'freedom' they possess the right to a quite peculiar freedom of
  motion - freedom to move the tongue and to say what they choose, freedom to move about the streets, etc. A bitter
  deception!And the same is true of democracy. In general even in the early days both England and France had already been bound
  with the fetters of slavery. With, I might say, a brazen security these States are fettered with Jewish chains....In consequence of this widespread aversion it was more difficult for the Jew to spread infection in the political
  sphere, and especially so since traditionally loyalty was centered in a person: the form of the State was a monarchy,
  and power did not lie with an irresponsible majority. Thus the Jew saw that here it was possible for an enlightened
  despotism to arise based upon the army, the bureaucracy, and the masses of the people still unaffected by the Jewish
  poison.The intelligentsia at that time was almost exclusively German, big business and the new industries were
  in German hands, while the last reservoir of a people's strength, the peasantry, was throughout healthy. In such
  conditions if, as industry grew, a fourth estate was formed in the towns, there was the danger that this fourth estate
  might ally itself with the monarchy, and thus with its support there might arise a popular monarchy or
  a popular 'Kaisertum' which would be ready and willing to give a mortal blow to those powers of international
  supra-State finance which were at that time beginning to grow in influence. This was not impossible: in the history
  of Germany princes had from time to time found themselves forced, as in Brandenburg, to turn against the nobility and
  seek popular support.But this possibility constituted a grave danger for Jewry. If the great masses of the new industrialized workmen had
  come into Nationalist hands and like a true social leaven had penetrated the whole nation, if the liberation of the
  different estates had followed step by step in an organic development and the State had later looked to them
  for support, then there would have been created what many hoped for in November, 1918, viz., a national social State.
  For Socialism in itself is anything but an international creation. As a noble conception it has indeed grown up
  exclusively in Aryan hearts: it owes its intellectual glories only to Aryan brains. It is entirely alien to the
  Jew.The Jew will always be the born champion of private capital in its worst form, that of unchecked
  exploitation.... Voltaire, as well as Rousseau, together with our German Fichte and many another - they are all
  without exception united in their recognition that the Jew is not only a foreign element differing in his essential
  character, which is utterly harmful to the nature of the Aryan, but that the Jewish people in itself stands against
  us as our deadly foe and so will stand against us always and for all time.The master-stroke of the Jew was to claim the leadership of the fourth estate: he founded the Movement both of the
  Social Democrats and the Communists. His policy was twofold: he had his 'apostles' in both political camps. Amongst the
  parties of the Right he encouraged those features which were most repugnant to the people - the passion for money,
  unscrupulous methods in trade which were employed so ruthlessly as to give rise to the proverb 'Business, too,
  marches over corpses.' And the Jew attacked the parties of the Right. Jews wormed their way into the families of the
  upper classes: it was from the Jews that the latter took their wives. The result was that in a short time it was
  precisely the ruling class which became in its character completely estranged from its own people.And this fact gave the Jew his opportunity with the parties of the Left. Here he played the part of the common
  demagogue. Two means enabled him to drive away in disgust the whole intelligentsia of the nation from the leadership
  of the workers. First: his international attitude, for the native intelligence of the country is prepared to make
  sacrifices, it will do anything for the life of the people, but it cannot believe in the mad view that through the
  denial of that national life, through a refusal to defend the rights of one's own people, through the breaking down of
  the national resistance to the foreigner, it is possible to raise up a people and make it happy. That it cannot do, and
  so it remained at a distance.And the Jew's second instrument was the Marxist theory in and for itself. For
  directly one went on to assert that property as such is theft, directly one deserted the obvious formula that only
  the natural wealth of a country can and should be common property, but that that which a man creates or gains through
  his honest labor is his own, immediately the economic intelligentsia with its nationalist outlook could, here too,
  no longer co-operate: for this intelligentsia was bound to say to itself that this theory meant the collapse of any
  human civilization whatever. Thus the Jew succeeded in isolating this new movement of the workers from all the
  nationalist elements....More and more so to influence the masses that he persuaded those of the Right that the faults of the Left were the
  faults of the German workman, and similarly he made it appear to those of the Left that the faults of the Right
  were simply the faults of the so-called 'Bourgeois,' and neither side noticed that on both sides the faults were the
  result of a scheme planned by alien devilish agitators. And only so is it possible to explain how this dirty joke of
  world history could come to be that Stock Exchange Jews should become the leaders of a Workers Movement. It is a
  gigantic fraud: world history has seldom seen its like.And then we must ask ourselves: what are the final aims of this development?So soon as millions of men have had it hammered into them that they are so oppressed and enslaved that it matters not
  what their personal attitude may be to their people, their State, or economic life, then a kind of passive resistance
  must result, which sooner or later will do fatal damage to the national economy. Through the preaching of the Marxist
  economic theory the national economy must go to ruin. We see the results in Russia: the end of the whole economic life of
  the State: the handing over of the community to the international world of finance. And the process is furthered
  through the organization of the 'political strike.' Often there are no adequate economic grounds for a strike, but
  there are always political grounds and plenty of them.And to this must be added the practical political sabotage of the State, since the thought of the individual is
  concentrated on the idea of international solidarity. It is clear that a nation's economic life depends upon the
  strength of a national State: it does not live on such phrases as 'Appeasement of the peoples' or 'Freedom of the
  Peoples.'At the moment when no people supports the economic life of a nation, ready to give it its protection, at that moment
  economic life collapses. The breaking in pieces of a nation's strength is the end of a nation's prosperity, the
  national existence must cease altogether.And one can see constantly how wonderfully the Stock Exchange Jew and the leader of the workers, how the Stock
  Exchange organ and the journal of the workers, co-operate. They both pursue one common policy and a single aim. Moses
  Kohn on the one side encourages his association to refuse the workers' demands, while his brother Isaac in the factory
  incites the masses and shouts, 'Look at them! they only want to oppress you! Shake off your fetters....'His brother takes care that the fetters are well and truly forged. The Stock Exchange organ seeks without
  intermission to encourage fevered speculation and unparalleled corners in grain and in
  the food of the people, while the workmen's newspaper lets off all its guns on the masses, telling them that bread is
  dearer and this, that, and the other is dearer: up Proletarians! endure it no longer-down with . . .How long can this process last? It means the utter destruction not only of economic life, but of the people. It
  is clear that all these apostles who talk their tongues out of their heads, but who spend the night in the Hotel
  Excelsior, travel in express trains, and spend their leave for their health in Nice - these people do not exert their
  energies for love of the people. No, the people is not to profit, it shall merely be brought into dependence on these
  men. The backbone of its independence, its own economic life, is to be destroyed, that it may the more surely
  relapse into the golden fetters of the perpetual interest-slavery of the Jewish race. And this process will
  end when suddenly out of the masses someone arises who seizes the leadership, finds other comrades and fans into
  flame the passions which have been held in check and looses them against the deceivers.That is the lurking danger, and the Jew can meet it in one way only - by destroying the hostile national
  intelligentsia. That is the inevitable ultimate goal of the Jew in his revolution. And this aim he must pursue; he knows
  well enough his economics brings no blessing: his is no master people: he is an exploiter: the Jews are a people of
  robbers. He has never founded any civilization, though he has destroyed civilizations by the hundred. He possesses
  nothing of his own creation to which he can point.Everything that he has is stolen. Foreign peoples, foreign workmen build him his temples, it is foreigners who create
  and work for him: it is foreigners who shed their blood for him. He knows no 'people's army': he has only hired
  mercenaries who are ready to go to death on his behalf. He has no art of his own: bit by bit he has stolen it all from
  the other peoples or has watched them at work and then made his copy. He does not even know how merely to preserve the
  precious things which others have created: as he turns the treasures over in his hand they are transformed into dirt
  and dung. He knows that he cannot maintain any State for long. That is one of the differences between him and the
  Aryan. True, the Aryan also has dominated other peoples. But how? He entered on the land, he cleared the forests; out of
  wildernesses he has created civilizations, and he has not used the others for his own interests, he has, so far as
  their capacities permitted, incorporated them into his State and through him art and science were brought to flower. In
  the last resort it was the Aryan and the Aryan alone who could form States and could set them on their path to future
  greatness.All that the Jew cannot do. And because he cannot do it, therefore all his revolutions must be 'international.' They
  must spread as a pestilence spreads. He can build no State and say 'See here, Here stands the State, a model for all.
  Now copy us!' He must take care that the plague does not die, that it is not limited to one place, or else in a short
  time this plague-hearth would burn itself out. So he is forced to bring every mortal thing to an international
  expansion. For how long? Until the whole world sinks in ruins and brings him down with it in the midst of the ruins.That process today in Russia is practically complete. The whole of present-day Russia has nothing to show beyond a
  ruined civilization, a colony ripe for development through alien capital, and even this capital in order to supply
  resources in labor for its practical work must introduce Aryan intellects, since for this again the Jew is useless.
  Here, too, he is all rapacity, never satisfied. He knows no ordered economy, he knows no ordered body of administrators.
  Over there in Russia he is laying his hands on everything. They take the noble's diamonds to help 'the People.' The
  diamonds then stray into foreign societies and are no more seen. He seizes to himself the treasures of the churches,
  but not to feed the people: oh no! Everything wanders away and leaves not a trace behind. In his greed he has become
  quite senseless: he can keep hold of nothing: he has only within him the instinct for destruction, and so he himself
  collapses with the treasure that he has destroyed.It is a tragic fate: we have often grown excited over the death of a criminal: if an anarchist is shot in Spain we
  raise a mighty howl over 'the sacrifice of valuable human blood' . . . and here in the East thirty million human beings
  are being slowly martyred - done to death, some on the scaffold, some by machine guns . . . millions upon millions
  through starvation.... A whole people is dying, and now we can perhaps understand how it was possible that formerly all
  the civilizations of Mesopotamia disappeared without a trace so that one can only with difficulty find in the desert sand
  the remains of these cities. We see how in our own day whole countries die out under this scourge of God, and we see how
  this scourge is threatening Germany, too, and how with us our own people in mad infatuation is contributing to bring
  upon itself the same yoke, the same misery.We know that the Revolution which began in 1918 has covered perhaps but the first third of its course. Two things,
  however, there are which must scourge it forward upon its way: economic causes and political causes. On the economic
  side, the ever-growing distress, and in the political sphere, are not nearly all Germans in their hearts - let each
  one admit it - in despair when they consider the situation which leaves us quite defenseless in face of a Europe which
  is so hostile to Germany? AND WHY IS EUROPE HOSTILE? WE SEE HOW OVER THERE IN THIS OTHER EUROPE IT IS NOT THE PEOPLES
  WHICH AGITATE AGAINST US, IT IS THE SECRET POWER OF THE ORGANIZED PRESS WHICH CEASELESSLY POURS NEW POISON INTO THE
  HEARTS OF THESE PEOPLES.And who are then these bandits of the press? The brothers and the relatives of the publishers of our own newspapers.
  And the capital source which provides the energy which here - and there - drives them forward is the Jewish dream of World
  Supremacy.Today the idea of international solidarity has lost its force, one can still bring men out of the factories, but
  only by means of terrorism. If you ask for an honest answer the worker will confess that he no longer believes in this
  international solidarity. And the belief in the so-called reasonableness of the other peoples has gone too. How often
  have we been told that reason will lead them not to be too hard with us: true, reason should have moved them thus, but
  what did move them had nothing to do with reason. For here there is no question of the thought of reasonable peoples:
  it is the thought of a wild beast, tearing, raging in its unreason, that drives all of them to the same ruin as that
  to which we ourselves are driven.So the masses of the people in Germany are becoming, in the political sphere, completely lost. Yet here and there people
  are beginning to get some practice in criticism. Slowly, cautiously, and yet with a certain accuracy the finger is
  being placed on the real wound of our people. And thus one comes to realize: if only this development goes on for a
  time, it might be possible that from Germany the light should come which is destined to light both Germany and the
  world to their salvation. And at that point the everlasting lie begins to work against us with every means in its
  power....It is said, if one criticizes the state of affairs to which we have been brought today, that one is a reactionary, a
  monarchist, a pan-German. I ask you what would probably have been the state of Germany today if during these three years
  there had been no criticism at all? I believe that in fact there has been far, far too little criticism. OUR PEOPLE
  UNFORTUNATELY IS MUCH TOO UNCRITICAL, OR OTHERWISE IT WOULD LONG AGO HAVE NOT ONLY SEEN THROUGH MANY THINGS, BUT WOULD
  HAVE SWEPT THEM AWAY WITH ITS FIST! The crisis is developing towards its culmination. The day is not far distant when,
  for the reasons which I have stated, the German Revolution must be carried forward another step. The leaders know all
  too well that things cannot always go on as they are going today. One may raise prices ten times by 100 per cent, but
  it is doubtful if in the end even a German will accept a milliard of marks for his day's wage if in the last resort
  with his milliard-wage he must still starve. It is a question whether one will be able to keep up this great
  fraud upon the nation. There will come a day when this must stop - and therefore one must build for that day, before it
  comes.And so now Germany is reaching that stage which Russia has drunk to the lees. Now in one last stupendous assault they
  will finally crush all criticism, all opposition, no, rather whatever honesty is still left to us, and that they will do
  the more rapidly the more clearly they see that the masses are beginning to understand one thing - National Socialist
  teaching.Whether for the moment it comes to them under that name or under another, the fact is that everywhere more and more it
  is making headway. Today all these folk cannot yet belong to a single party, but, wherever you go, in Germany, yes almost
  in the whole world, you find already millions of thinking men who know that a State can be built only on a social
  foundation and they know also that the deadly foe of every social conception is the international Jew.Every truly national idea is in the last resort social, i.e., he who is prepared so completely to adopt the cause of
  his people that he really knows no higher ideal than the prosperity of this - his own - people, he who has so taken to
  heart the meaning of our great song 'Deutschland, Deutschland uber alles,' that nothing in this world stands
  for him higher than this Germany, people and land, land and people, he is a Socialist! And he who in this people
  sympathizes with the poorest of its citizens, who in this people sees in every individual a valuable member of the
  whole community, and who recognizes that this community can flourish only when it is formed not of rulers and oppressed
  but when all according to their capacities fulfill their duty to their Fatherland and the community of the people
  and are valued accordingly, he who seeks to preserve the native vigor, the strength, and the youthful energy of the
  millions of working men, and who above all is concerned that our precious possession, our youth, should not before its
  time be used up in unhealthy harmful work - he is not merely a Socialist, but he is also National in the highest sense of
  that word.It is the teaching of these facts which appears to the Jews as leaders of the Revolution today to constitute a
  threatening danger. And it is precisely this which more than anything else makes the Jew wish to get in his blow as soon
  as possible. For one thing he knows quite well: in the last resort there is only one danger which he has to fear-and
  that danger is this young Movement.He knows the old parties. They are easily satisfied. Only endow them with a few seats as ministers or with similar
  posts and they are ready to go along with you. And in especial he knows one thing: they are so innocently stupid.
  In their case the truth of the old saying is proved afresh every day: 'Those whom the gods wish to destroy, they first
  strike with blindness.' They have been struck with blindness: therefore it follows that the gods wish to
  destroy them. Only look at these parties and their leaders, Stresemann and the rest of them. They are indeed not
  dangerous. They never go to the roots of the evil: they all still think that with forbearance, with humanity, with
  accommodation they can fight a battle which has not its equal in this world. Through gentleness they think that they
  must demonstrate to the enemy of the Left that they are ready for appeasement so as to stay the deadly cancerous
  ulcer through a policy of moderation.No! A thousand times No! Here there are only two possibilities: either victory or defeat!What today is the meaning of these great preparations for the decisive battle on the part of bolshevist Judaism?-To make the nation defenseless in arms and to make the people defenseless in spirit.Two great aims!Abroad Germany is already humiliated. The State trembles before every French Negro-captain, the nation is no longer
  dangerous. And within Germany they have seen to it that arms should be taken away from the decent elements of the people
  and that in their stead Russian-Jewish-bolshevist bands should be armed. Only one thing remains still to do: viz.,
  the muzzling of the spirit, above all the arrest of the evil 'agitators' - that is the name they give to those who dare to
  tell the people the truth. Not only are their organizations to be known to all, but the masses are to be incited against
  their persons. Just as the Jew could once incite the mob of Jerusalem against Christ, so today he must succeed in
  inciting folk who have been duped into madness to attack those who, God's truth! seek to deal with this people in
  utter honesty and sincerity. And so he begins to intimidate them, and he knows that this pressure in itself is enough to
  shut the mouths of hundreds, yes, of thousands. For they think, if I only hold my tongue, then I shall be safe in
  case they come into power. No, my friend. The only difference will be that I may hang perhaps still talking,
  while you will hang - in silence. Here, too, Russia can give us countless examples, and with us it will be the same
  story.We know that the so-called 'Law for the Protection of the Republic' which comes from Berlin today is nothing else than
  a means for reducing all criticism to silence. We know, too, that no effort will be spared so that the last outstanding
  personalities - those who within Germany foresee the coming of disaster - shall in good time disappear. And to that end the
  population of North Germany will be scourged into opposition to Bavaria with every lie and every misrepresentation that
  comes to hand. Up there they have the feeling that in one corner of the Reich the spirit of the German people is not
  yet broken. And that is the point to which we National Socialists have to grapple ourselves. We National Socialists
  are, God's truth! perhaps the most loyal, the most devoted of all men to our German Fatherland. For three years we have
  waged a war, often against death and devil, but always only for our German Fatherland. We got so far that at the last,
  as crown of all our labors, we had to land in prison. But in spite of everything there is one thing we would say: We do
  make a distinction between a Government and the German Fatherland. When today here in the Landtag or in the
  Reichstag at Berlin some lousy half-Asiatic youth casts in our teeth the charge that we have no loyalty to the Reich, I
  beg you do not distress yourselves. The Bavarian people has sealed its loyalty to the Reich with its countless regiments
  which fought for the Reich and often sank under the earth two or three times. We are convinced, and that in the last
  resort is our one great faith, that out of this bitterest distress and this utter misery the German Reich will rise
  again, but not as now, not as the offspring of wretchedness and misery - we shall possess once again a true German Reich
  of freedom and of honor, a real Fatherland of the whole German people and not an asylum for alien swindlers. There
  is today constant talk about 'Federalism,' etc. I beg you not to abuse the Prussians while at the same time you grovel
  before the Jews, but show yourselves stiff-necked against the folk of Berlin. And if you do that, then you will have
  on your side in the whole of Germany millions and millions of Germans, whether they be Prussians or men of Baden,
  Wurttembergers, men of Saxony, or Germans of Austria. Now is the hour to stand stiff-necked and resist to the last!We National Socialists who for three years have done nothing but preach - abused and insulted by all, by some
  mocked and scorned, by others traduced and slandered - we cannot retreat! For us there is only one path which leads
  straight ahead. We know that the fight which now is blazing will be a hard struggle. It will not be fought out in the
  court of the Reich at Leipzig, it will not be fought out in a cabinet at Berlin, it will be fought out through those
  factors which in their hard reality have ever up to the present time made world history. I heard recently in the
  speech of a minister that the rights of a State cannot be set aside through simple majority decisions, but only
  through treaties. BISMARCK ONCE USED DIFFERENT LANGUAGE ON THIS SUBJECT: HE THOUGHT THAT THE DESTINIES OF PEOPLES COULD
  BE DETERMINED NEITHER THROUGH MAJORITY DECISIONS NOR THROUGH TREATIES, BUT ONLY THROUGH BLOOD AND IRON.On one point there should be no doubt: we will not let the Jews slit our gullets and not defend ourselves. Today in
  Berlin they may already be arranging their festival-dinners with the Jewish hangmen of Soviet Russia - that they will
  never do here. They may today begin to set up the Cheka - the Extraordinary Commission - in Germany, they may give it free
  scope, we surrender to such a Jewish Commission never! We have the conviction, firm as a rock, that, if in this State
  seven million men are determined to stand by their 'No' to the very last, the evil specter will collapse into
  nothingness in the rest of the Reich. For what Germany needs today, what Germany longs for ardently, is a symbol of
  power, and strength.So as I come to the end of my speech I want to ask something of those among you who are young. And for that
  there is a very special reason. The old parties train their youth in the gift of the gab, we prefer to train them to use
  their bodily strength. For I tell you: the young man who does not find his way to the place where in the last resort
  the destiny of his people is most truly represented, only studies philosophy and in a time like this buries himself
  behind his books or sits at home by the fire, he is no German youth! I call upon you! Join our Storm Divisions! And
  however many insults and slanders you may hear if you do join, you all know that the Storm Divisions have been formed
  for our protection, for your protection, and at the same time not merely for the protection of the Movement, but for
  the protection of a Germany that is to be. If you are reviled and insulted, good luck to you, my boys! You have
  the good fortune already at eighteen or nineteen years of age to be hated by the greatest of scoundrels. What others
  can win only after a lifetime of toil, this highest gift of distinguishing between the honest man and the brigand, falls
  as a piece of luck into your lap while you are but youths. You can be assured that the more they revile you, the more
  we respect you. We know that if you were not there, none of us would make another speech. We know, we see clearly that
  our Movement would be cudgelled down if you did not protect it! You are the defense of a Movement that is called one day
  to remodel Germany in revolutionary fashion from its very foundations in order that there may come to birth what
  perhaps so many expected on the ninth of November: a German Reich and a Germanic and, so far as in us lies, a German
  Republic.Every battle must be fought to the end - better that it come early than late. And he ever stands most securely who from
  the first goes to the fight with the greatest confidence. And this highest confidence we can carry with us in our
  hearts. For he who on our side is today the leader of the German people, God's truth! he has nothing to win but
  perhaps only everything to lose. He who today fights on our side cannot win great laurels, far less can he win great
  material goods - it is more likely that he will end up in jail. He who today is leader must be an idealist, if only
  for the reason that he leads those against whom it would seem that everything has conspired.But in that very fact there lies an inexhaustible source of strength. The conviction that our Movement is not sustained
  by money or the lust for gold, but only by our love for the people, that must ever give us fresh heart, that must ever
  fill us with courage for the fray.And as my last word, take with you this assurance: if this battle should not come, never would Germany win peace.
  Germany would decay and at the best would sink to ruin like a rotting corpse. But that is not our destiny. We do not
  believe that this misfortune which today our God sends over Germany has no meaning: it is surely the scourge which
  should and shall drive us to a new greatness, to a new power and glory, to a Germany which for the first time shall
  fulfill that which in their hearts millions of the best of our fellow countrymen have hoped for through the centuries
  and the millennia, to the Germany of the German people!Munich -- Speech of August 1, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF AUGUST 1, 1923. . . THERE are two things which can unite men: common ideals and common
  criminality. We have inscribed upon our banner the great Germanic ideal and
  for that ideal we will fight to the last drop of our blood. We National
  Socialists have realized that from the international cesspool of infamy,
  from the Berlin of today, nothing can come to save the Fatherland. We know
  that two things alone will save us: first, the end of internal corruption,
  the cleansing out of all those who owe their existence simply to the protection
  of their party comrades. Through the most brutal ruthlessness towards all
  party officials we must restore our finances. It must be proved that the
  official is not a party man, but a specialist! The body of German officials
  must once more become what once it was. But the second and the most important
  point is that the day must come when a German government shall summon up
  the courage to declare to the Foreign Powers: 'The Treaty of Versailles is
  founded on a monstrous lie. We refuse to carry out its terms any longer.
  Do what you will! If you wish for war, go and get it! Then we shall see whether
  you can turn seventy million Germans into serfs and slaves!'If cowards cry out: 'But we have no arms!' that is neither here nor there!
  When the whole German people knows one will and one will only - to be free
  - in that hour we shall have the instrument with which to win our freedom.
  It matters not whether these weapons of ours are humane: if they gain us
  our freedom, they are justified before our conscience and before our God.
  When the eyes of German children look questioning into ours, when we see
  the suffering and distress of millions of our fellow-countrymen who without
  any fault of theirs have fallen into this frightful misfortune, then we laugh
  at the curses of the whole world, if from these curses there issues the freedom
  of our race.But since we know that today the German people consists for one-third of
  heroes, for another third of cowards, while the rest are traitors, as a condition
  of our freedom in respect of the outside world we would first cleanse our
  domestic life. The present 'United Front' has failed in that task. The day
  of another 'United Front' will come. But before that there must be a day
  of reckoning for those who for four and a half years have led us on their
  criminal ways. The domestic battle must come before the battle with the world
  without - the final decision between those who say 'We are Germans and proud
  of the fact' and those who do not wish to be Germans or who are not Germans
  at all. Our Movement is opposed with the cry 'The Republic is in danger!'
  Your Republic of the Ninth of November? In very truth it is: the
  November-Republic is in danger! How long, think you, you can maintain this
  'State? . . .Our Movement was not formed with any election in view, but in order to spring
  to the rescue of this people as its last help in the hour of greatest need,
  at the moment when in fear and despair it sees the approach of the Red Monster.
  The task of our Movement is still today not to prepare ourselves for any
  coming election but to prepare for the coming collapse of the Reich, so that
  when the old trunk falls the young fir-tree may be already standing. The
  Via dolorosa of Germany from Wirth, by way of Cuno to Stresemann, will end
  in the dictatorship of a Jewish lord of finance.... WE WANT TO BE THE SUPPORTERS
  OF THE DICTATORSHIP OF NATIONAL REASON, OF NATIONAL ENERGY, OF NATIONAL BRUTALITY
  AND RESOLUTION. GERMANY CAN BE SAVED ONLY THROUGH ACTION, WHEN THROUGH OUR
  TALKING HERE THE BANDAGE HAS BEEN TORN FROM THE EYES OF THE LAST OF THE BEFOOLED.
  It is from our Movement that redemption will come - that today is the feeling
  of millions. That has become almost a new religious faith! And there will
  be only two possibilities: either Berlin marches and ends up in Munich, or
  Munich marches and ends up in Berlin! A bolshevist North Germany and a
  nationalist Bavaria cannot exist side by side, and the greatest influence
  upon the fortunes of the German Reich will be his who shall restore the Reich....
  Either Germany sinks, and we through our despicable cowardice sink with it,
  or else we dare to enter on the fight against death and devil and rise up
  against the fate that has been planned for us. THEN WE SHALL SEE WHICH IS
  THE STRONGER: THE SPIRIT OF INTERNATIONAL JEWRY OR THE WILL OF GERMANY.Nuremberg -- Speech of September 6, 1938NUREMBERGSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 6, 1938THE proof of the endowment of a true artist is always to be found in the
  fact that his work of art expresses the general will of a period. Perhaps
  that is most clearly shown in architecture.... The religious mystical world
  of the Christian Middle Ages, turning inwards upon itself, found forms of
  expression which were possible only for that world - for that world alone
  could they be of service. A Gothic stadium is as unthinkable as a Romanesque
  railway station or a Byzantine market hall. The way in which the artist of
  the Middle Ages, of the beginnings of the modern world, found the artistic
  solution for the buildings which he was commissioned to create is in the
  highest degree striking and admirable. That way, however, is no evidence
  that the conception of the content of life held by the folk of his day was
  in itself either absolutely right or absolutely wrong; it is evidence only
  that works of art have rightly mirrored the inner mind of a past age. It
  is therefore quite comprehensible that insofar as the attempt is made to
  carry on the life of that past age, those who search for solutions of artistic
  problems can still seek and find there fruitful suggestions. Thus one can
  easily imagine that, for instance, in the sphere of religion men will always
  work backwards to the form-language of a period in which Christianity in
  its view of the world appeared to meet every need. On the other hand, at
  the present moment the expression of a new view of the world which is determined
  by the conception of race will return to those ages which in the past have
  already possessed a similar freedom of the spirit, of the will, and of the
  mind. Thus, naturally, the manifestation in art of a European conception
  of the State will not be possible through civilizations, as, for example,
  the civilization of the Far East, which - because foreign to us - have no
  message for our day, but will rather be influenced in a thousand ways through
  the evidences and memories of that mighty imperial Power of antiquity which,
  although in fact destroyed fifteen hundred years ago, still as an ideal force
  lives on and works on in the imaginations of men. The more nearly the modern
  State approaches to the imperial idea of the ancient World-Power, so more
  and more will the general character of that civilization be manifested in
  its influence upon the formation of the style of our own day.National Socialism is not a cult-movement - a movement for worship; it is
  exclusively a 'volkic' political doctrine based upon racial principles. In
  its purpose there is no mystic cult, only the care and leadership of a people
  defined by a common blood-relationship. Therefore we have no rooms for worship,
  but only halls for the people - no open spaces for worship, but spaces for
  assemblies and parades. We have no religious retreats, but arenas for sports
  and playing-fields, and the characteristic feature of our places of assembly
  is not the mystical gloom of a cathedral, but the brightness and light of
  a room or hall which combines beauty with fitness for its purpose. In these
  halls no acts of worship are celebrated, they are exclusively devoted to
  gatherings of the people of the kind which we have come to know in the course
  of our long struggle; to such gatherings we have become accustomed and we
  wish to maintain them. We will not allow mystically-minded occult folk with
  a passion for exploring the secrets of the world beyond to steal into our
  Movement. Such folk are not National Socialists, but something else - in
  any case, something which has nothing to do with us. At the head of our program
  there stand no secret surmisings but clear-cut perception and straightforward
  profession of belief. But since we set as the central point of this perception
  and of this profession of belief the maintenance and hence the security for
  the future of a being formed by God, we thus serve the maintenance of a divine
  work and fulfill a divine will - not in the secret twilight of a new house
  of worship, but openly before the face of the Lord.There were times when a half-light was the necessary condition for the
  effectiveness of certain teachings: we live in an age when light is for us
  the fundamental condition of successful action. It will be a sorry day when
  through the stealing in of obscure mystic elements the Movement or the State
  itself issues obscure commissions.... It is even dangerous to issue any
  commission for a so-called place of worship, for with the building will arise
  the necessity for thinking out so-called religious recreations or religious
  rites, which have nothing to do with National Socialism. Our worship is
  exclusively the cultivation of the natural, and for that reason, because
  natural, therefore God-willed. Our humility is the unconditional submission
  before the divine laws of existence so far as they are known to us men: it
  is to these we pay our respect. Our commandment is the courageous fulfillment
  of the duties arising from those laws. But for religious rites we are not
  the authorities, but the churches! If anyone should believe that these tasks
  of ours are not enough for him, that they do not correspond with his convictions,
  then it is for him to prove that God desires to use him to change things
  for the better. In no event can National Socialism or the National Socialist
  State give to German art other tasks than those which accord with our view
  of the world.The only sphere in which the Jewish international newspapers still today
  think that they can attack the new Reich is the cultural sphere. Here they
  attempt, by a constant appeal to the sentimentality - untroubled by any sort
  of knowledge - of the world-citizens of democracy to bewail the downfall
  of German culture: in other words, they lament the commercial closing-down
  of those elements which, as the heralds and exponents of the November Republic,
  forced their cultural characteristics, as unnatural as they were deplorable,
  upon the period between the two Empires; and which have now played out their
  role for good and all....Fortunately, however, despite the short time which the National Socialist
  leadership has been able to allot to works of culture, positive facts, here
  too, speak louder than any negative criticism. We Germans can today speak
  with justice of a new awakening of our cultural life, which finds its
  confirmation not in mutual compliments and literary phrases, but rather in
  positive evidences of cultural creative force. German architecture, sculpture,
  painting, drama, and the rest bring today documentary proof of a creative
  period in art, which for richness and impetuosity has rarely been matched
  in the course of human history. And although the Jewish-democratic press
  magnates in their effrontery even today seek brazenly to turn these facts
  upside down, we know that the cultural achievements of Germany will in a
  few years have won from the world respect and appreciation far more unstinted
  even than that which they now accord to our work in the material field. The
  buildings which are arising in the Reich today will speak a language that
  endures, a language, above all, more compelling than the Yiddish gabblings
  of the democratic, international judges of our culture. What the fingers
  of these poor wretches have penned or are penning the world will - perhaps
  unfortunately - forget, as it has forgotten so much else. But the gigantic
  works of the Third Reich are a token of its cultural renascence and shall
  one day belong to the inalienable cultural heritage of the Western world,
  just as the great cultural achievements of this world in the past belong
  to us today.Moreover, it is naturally not decisive what attitude, if any, foreign peoples
  take toward our works of culture, for we have no doubt that cultural creative
  work, since it is the most sensitive expression of a talent conditioned by
  blood, cannot be understood, far less appreciated, by individuals or races
  who are not of the same or related blood. Therefore we do not trouble in
  any way to make German art and culture suit the tastes of international Jewry....The art of Greece is not merely a formal reproduction of the Greek mode of
  life, of the landscapes and inhabitants of Greece; no, it is a proclamation
  of the Greek body and of the essential Greek spirit. It does not make propaganda
  for an individual work, for the subject, or for the artist; it makes propaganda
  for the Greek world as such, which confronts us in Hellenism....And so art today will in the same way announce and herald that common mental
  attitude, that common view of life, which governs the present age. It will
  do this not because this age entrusts commissions to artists, but because
  the execution of these commissions can meet with understanding only if it
  reveals in itself the true essence of the spirit of this age. The mysticism
  of Christianity, at the period of its greatest intensity, demanded for the
  buildings which it ordered an architectonic form which not only did not
  contradict the spirit of the age, but rather helped it to attain that mysterious
  gloom which made men the more ready to submit to renunciation of self. The
  growing protest against this crushing of the freedom of the soul and of the
  will, which had lasted for centuries, immediately opened the way to new forms
  of expression in artistic creation. The mystic narrowness and gloom of the
  cathedrals began to recede and, to match the free life of the spirit, buildings
  became spacious and flooded with light. Mystical twilight gave way before
  increasing brightness. The unsteady, groping transition of the nineteenth
  century led finally in our days to that crisis which in one way or another
  had to find its solution. Jewry, with its bolshevist onslaught, might smash
  the Aryan States and destroy those native strata of the people whose blood
  destined them for leadership, and in that case the culture which had hitherto
  sprung from these roots would be brought to the same destruction....Munich -- Speech of September 12, 1923MUNICHSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 12, 1923. . . THE Republic was founded to be a milk-cow for its founders - for the
  whole parliamentary gang. It was never intended to be a State for the German
  people, but a feeding ground, as pleasant and as rich a feeding-ground as
  possible. There never was any thought of giving to the German people a free
  State: the object was to provide a mob of the lowest scoundrels with an obliging
  object for their exploitation. The fruit of the honest work of other folk
  has been stolen by those who themselves have never worked. And if we refuse
  to grasp the facts, the outside world knows better. The outside world despises
  the representatives of this November-Republic! Neither in society nor in
  the meetings of diplomats are they regarded as equals, much less as men of
  character.Think of Lloyd George - this man with the single fanatical idea - that England
  must be led to victory. There comes up to him one of the 'November men' of
  whom he knows: 'My people would have been defeated if your people by you
  had not been...' How will Lloyd George receive him? Surely with unspeakable
  contempt! For he knows what we can only guess, how in the war the millions
  of gold poured into Germany, how they began to take effect, how great
  associations of traitors were formed through foreign gold - through his gold.
  And now he sees face to face the man to whom before he paid out the Judas-wage.
  What do you think Lloyd George will do? He can only spit at the sight. Never
  can any one of the 'November criminals' represent Germany before the world!
  . . .The Republic, by God! is worthy of its fathers. For hardly was the first
  deed of shame committed when there followed the second - one dishonor after
  another! One can scarcely believe any longer that there was once a time when
  one could speak of the Germans as the first people in the world.The essential character of the November-Republic is to be seen in the comings
  and goings to London, to Spa, to Paris and Genoa. Subserviency towards the
  enemy, surrender of the human dignity of the German, pacifist cowardice,
  tolerance of every indignity, readiness to agree to everything until nothing
  more remains. This November Republic bore the stamp of the men who made it.
  The name 'November criminals' will cling to these folk throughout the
  centuries....How are States founded? Through the personality of brilliant leaders and
  through a people which deserves to have the crown of laurel bound about its
  brows. Compare with them the 'heroes' of this Republic! Shirkers, Deserters,
  and Pacifists: these are its founders and their heroic acts consisted in
  leaving in the lurch the soldiers at the front, in stopping reinforcements,
  in withholding from them munitions, while at home against old men and
  half-starved children they carried through a revolutionary coup d'etat. They
  have quite simply got together their November State by theft! In the face
  of the armies returning wearied from the front these thieves have still posed
  as the saviours of the Fatherland! They declared the Pacifist-Democratic
  Republic. On the other hand I ask: What can be the only meaning of loyalty
  to the State? The loyalty of heroes! This Revolution has dishonored the old
  heroes on whom the whole earth had looked with wonder; it allowed the scum
  of the streets to tear off their decorations and to hurl into the mire all
  that was sacred to the heroes of the front line. And how does the Republic
  honor now the new heroes? Schlageter? By warrants for his arrest.Pacifism as the idea of the State, international law instead of power - all
  means are good enough to unman the people. They hold India up to us as a
  model and what is called 'passive resistance.' True, they want to make an
  India of Germany, a folk of dreams which turns away its face from realities,
  in order that they can oppress it for all eternity, that they may span it
  body and soul to the yoke of slavery....In the economic sphere this Revolution has proved to be an immense misfortune.
  The districts which were most important for the feeding of our people were
  lost and districts which are the condition for the feeding of the nation
  have been treasonably alienated. And what did the Revolution not prophesy
  for us in the political sphere? One heard of the right of Self-Determination
  of Peoples, of the League of Nations, of Self-Government of the People. And
  what was the result? A World Peace, but a World Peace over a Germany which
  was but a field of corpses. Disarmament, but only the disarmament of Germany,
  with Germany looting its own resources. Self-determination, yes, but
  self-determination for every Negro tribe: and Germany does not count as a
  Negro tribe. League of Nations, yes: but a League of Nations which serves
  only as the guarantor for the fulfillment of the Peace Treaty, not for a
  better world order which is to come. And government by the people - for five
  years past no one has asked the people what it thinks of the act of November
  of the year 1918: at the head of the Reich there stands a President who is
  rejected by the overwhelming majority of the people and who has not been
  chosen by the people. Seventeen million Germans are in misery under foreign
  rule.Hardly ever in five years has so much been torn away from the German nation
  as in these years of the so-called successful Revolution. We have been rendered
  defenseless: we are without rights: we have become the pariahs of the world.
  What are our organs of government today but organs for executing the will
  of foreign tyrants? . . .We were given a Free State which never deserved the name of 'free.' Then
  they called it a 'People's State.' But think you that bankers can form a
  government which befits a 'People's State'?In fact the Revolution made three changes in our State: it internationalized
  the German State, the economic life of Germany, and the German people itself.
  Thereby Germany has been turned into a colony of the outside world. Those
  who were fed with the ideal of the International were in fact placed under
  the 'Diktat' of the International. They have their international State: today
  international finance is king....While the masses were still told lies about 'socialization,' the economic
  life of Germany was in fact socialized, not by the German people, but by
  the outside world....Through the internationalization of the nation itself in the end a people
  ceases to be master of its own fate: it becomes the puppet of alien forces.Is that, now, a People's Revolution? Is such a construction a People's State?
  No, it is the Jews' Paradise.Nuremberg, Labor-Front -- Speech of September 12, 1936NUREMBERG, LABOR-FRONTSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 12, 1936HOW Germany has to work to wrest a few square kilometers from the ocean and
  from the swamps while others are swimming in a superfluity of land!If I had the Ural Mountains with their incalculable store of treasures in
  raw materials, Siberia with its vast forests, and the Ukraine with its tremendous
  wheat fields, Germany and the National Socialist leadership, would swim in
  plenty! . . .There was sometimes advanced as an excuse for Russia that she had been through
  war and through revolution. Well, we stood against twenty-six States in the
  war and we had a revolution, but I have taken as my fundamental law not to
  destroy anything. Had I done so there would have been an excuse for rebuilding
  during another eighteen years.But that was not our plan. We wanted additional work for our unemployed and
  the use of the volume of their increased production to increase every man's
  share in consumption. Wages are not based on production; production itself
  is the wage.If I had wished I could have substituted officials for employers, but nature
  and reality select best. We do not wish bureaucratic economics as in Russia,
  nor do we wish to establish economic democracy here.Yet that does not mean either that we wish to let things drift as they please.
  Our fundamental economic principles are, first, to unite all the forces existing,
  and secondly, to educate our people better in their use.This Labor Front is the greatest element in such education. You are servants
  of the nation, but you alone are nothing. As part of the organic whole you
  are everything....It is hard to build up a new life out of your poverty, but I am not complaining.
  On the contrary, I find it wonderful to face difficult problems.Some people say, 'He has brought out another plan.' When he had completed
  the first, why couldn't he leave us in peace? Now he is tackling problems
  that cannot be solved.'I say that they can be solved; there is no problem that cannot be, but faith
  is necessary. Think of the faith I had to have eighteen years ago, a single
  man on a lonely path. Yet I have come to leadership of the German people....People complain of a shortage of this and that - for instance, of a shortage
  of cotton. I say that in the next four years we shall produce our own German
  cloth.Others raise the question of rubber. I tell you that factories will spring
  from the earth and that in four years we shall ride on our own German rubber
  tires.It may then be asked, 'With what motive power will you drive you cars?' I
  say that we shall take gasoline from our own oil and coal.Whenever I see the Labor Front I am impressed by the word 'front.' It signifies
  one will, one goal of achievement. Life is hard for many, but it is hardest
  if you are unhappy and have no faith. Have faith. We are not a helpless State.Nothing can make me change my own belief. I am convinced that the unworthiest
  among us is he who cannot master his ill fortune.Danzig -- Speech of September 19, 1939DANZIGSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 19, 1939My District Leader, My Dear Danzigers:Not only you experience this moment with deepest emotion; nay, the entire
  German nation experiences it with you, and I, too, am aware of the greatness
  of the hour when I, for the first time, tread on the soil which German settlers
  occupied five centuries ago and which for five centuries was German, and
  which - thereof you may rest assured - will remain German. ...The fact that a province was torn from the German Reich and that other German
  territories were given to the Polish State was explained on the grounds of
  national necessity. Later, plebiscites everywhere showed that no one wished
  to become a part of the Polish State - that Polish State which arose out
  of the blood of countless German regiments. It then expanded at the expense
  of old settlement areas and above all at the expense of intelligence and
  economic possibility.One thing has been clearly proved in the last twenty years; the Poles who
  had not founded that culture also were not able to maintain it. It has been
  shown again that only he who is himself culturally creative can permanently
  maintain real cultural performance.Thirty years would have been sufficient to reduce again to barbarism those
  territories which the Germans, painstakingly and with industry and thrift,
  had saved from barbarism. Everywhere traces of this retrogression and decay
  were visible.Poland itself was a 'nationalities State.' That very thing had been created
  here which had been held against the old Austrian State. At the same time
  Poland was never a democracy. One very thin anemic upper class here ruled
  not only foreign nationalities but also its so-called own people.It was a State built on force and governed by the truncheons of the police
  and the military. The fate of Germans in this State was horrible. There is
  a difference whether people of lower cultural value has the misfortune to
  be governed by a culturally significant people or whether a people of high
  cultural significance has forced upon it the tragic fate of being oppressed
  by an inferior.In this inferior people all its inferiority complexes will be compensated
  upon a higher culture-bearing people. This people will be horribly and
  barbarically mistreated and Germans have been evidence of this fate for twenty
  years.It was, as already emphasized, tragic and painful. Nevertheless, as everywhere
  else, I tried to find a solution here which might have led to a fair adjustment.
  I have tried in the West and then later in the South to maintain final frontier
  delineations in order thus to deliver region upon region from uncertainty
  and assure peace and justice for the future. I made the greatest efforts
  to attain the same thing here also. . .The world, which immediately sheds tears when Germany expels a Polish Jew
  who only a few decades ago came to Germany, remained dumb and deaf toward
  the misery of those who, numbering not thousands but millions, were forced
  to leave their home country on account of Versailles - that is, if these
  unfortunates were Germans. What was for us and also for me most depressing
  was the fact that we had to suffer all this from a State which was far inferior
  to us; for, after all, Germany is a Great Power, even though madmen believed
  the vital rights of a great nation could be wiped out by a crazy treaty or
  by dictation.Germany was a big power and had to look on while a far inferior people of
  a far inferior State maltreated these Germans. There were two especially
  unbearable conditions: First, this city whose German character nobody could
  deny was not only prevented from returning to the Reich but in addition an
  attempt was made to Polonize it by all kinds of devices; second, the province
  [East Prussia] severed from the German Reich had no direct contact with the
  Reich, but traffic with this province was dependent upon all kinds of chicanery
  or upon the good will of this Polish State.No power on earth would have borne this condition as long as Germany. I do
  not know what England would have said about a similar peace solution at its
  expense or how America or France would have accepted it. I attempted to find
  a solution - a tolerable solution - even for this problem. I submitted this
  attempt to the Polish rulers in the form of verbal proposals. You know these
  proposals. They were more than moderate....I do not know what mental condition the Polish Government was in when it
  refused these proposals. I know, however, that millions of Germans sighed
  with relief, since they felt I had gone too far. As an answer, Poland gave
  the order for the first mobilization. Thereupon wild terror was initiated,
  and my request to the Polish Foreign Minister to visit me in Berlin once
  more to discuss these questions was re- fused. Instead of going to Berlin,
  he went to London. For the next weeks and months there were heightened threats,
  threats which were hardly bearable for a small State but which were impossible
  for a Great Power to bear for any length of time.We could read in Polish publications that the issue at stake was not Danzig
  but the problem of East Prussia, which Poland was to incorporate in a short
  time. That increased. Other Polish newspapers stated that East Prussia would
  not solve the problem, but that Pomerania must, under all circumstances,
  come to Poland.Finally it became questionable in Poland whether the Oder would be enough
  as a boundary or whether Poland's natural boundary was not the Oder but the
  Elbe. It was debated whether our armies would be smashed before or behind
  Berlin.The Polish Marshal, who miserably deserted his armies, said that he would
  hack the German Army to pieces. And martyrdom began for our German nationals.
  Tens of thousands were dragged off, mistreated, and murdered in the vilest
  fashion. Sadistic beasts gave vent to their perverse instincts, and this
  pious democratic world watched without blinking an eye.I have often asked myself: Who can have so blinded Poland? Does anyone really
  believe that the German nation will permanently stand that from such a ridiculous
  State? Does anyone seriously believe that? It must have been believed because
  certain quarters described it as possible to the Poles, certain quarters
  which general warmongers have occupied decades long, yes, hundreds of years
  long and which they occupy even today.These quarters declared that Germany was not even to be considered as a Power.
  The Poles were told that they would easily be able to resist Germany, and,
  going a step further, assurance was given that if their own resistance was
  not enough they could depend on the resistance and assistance of others.
  The guarantee was given which put it into the hands of a small State to begin
  a war, or again perhaps not to do so.For these men Poland, too, was only a means to an end. Because today it is
  being declared quite calmly that Poland was not the primary thing, but that
  the German regime is. I always warned against these men. You will recall
  my Saarbruecken and Wilhelmshaven speeches. In both these speeches I pointed
  out the danger that in a certain country such men could rise and unmolested
  preach the necessity of war - Herren Churchill, Eden, Duff-Cooper, etc.I pointed out how dangerous this is, especially in a country where one does
  not know whether these men may not be the Government in a short time. I was
  then told that that would never happen. In my opinion they are now the
  Government. It happened exactly as I then foresaw. I then decided for the
  first time to warn the German nation against them. But I also have left no
  doubt that Germany, under no circumstances, will capitulate to the threats
  or coercion of these people.On account of this answer I have been strongly attacked: because certain
  practices have gradually been developed in democracies: namely, in democracies
  war may be advocated. There foreign regimes and statesmen may be attacked,
  calumniated, insulted, sullied because there reign freedom of speech and
  the press. In authoritarian States, on the other hand, one may not defend
  one's self because there reigns discipline.You know, of course, of those August days. I believe it would have been possible
  in those last August days, without the British guarantee and without agitation
  by these warmongers, to have reached an understanding. At a certain moment
  England herself offered to bring us into direct discussion with Poland. I
  was ready. Of course it was the Poles who did not come.I came to Berlin with my Government and for two days waited and waited.
  Meanwhile, I had worked out a new pro- posal. You know it. I had the British
  Ambassador informed of it on the evening of the first day. It was read to
  him sentence by sentence and the Reich Foreign Minister gave him a supplementary
  explanation. Then came the next day and nothing occurred except for Polish
  general mobilization, renewed acts of terror, and finally attacks against
  Reich territory.Now in the life of nations, patience must not always be interpreted as weakness.
  For years I patiently looked on these continuous provocations. What keen
  suffering I underwent in these years only few can imagine, because there
  was hardly a month or week in which deputations from these districts did
  not come to me depicting unbearable conditions and imploring me to interfere.I have always begged them to try again. This continued for years, but I have
  recently also warned that this could not go on forever. After again waiting
  and even receiving new proposals I finally decided, as I declared in the
  Reichstag, to talk with Poland in the same language as they talked to us,
  or believed they could talk to us - the language which alone they seem to
  understand.Also, at this moment peace could have been saved. Friendly Italy and I1 Duce
  came in and made a suggestion for mediation. France agreed. I also expressed
  my agreement. Then England rejected also that suggestion and replied that,
  instead, Germany might be served with a two-hour ultimatum with impossible
  demands. England erred in one thing. There once was a government in Germany
  in November, 1918, that was kept by England, and they confound the present
  German regime with one they kept and confound the present German nation with
  the misled and blinded nation of that time.One does not send ultimatums to the Germany of today. - May London make note!In the last six years I had to stand intolerable things from States like
  Poland - nevertheless I sent no ultimatum. The German Reich is not inclined
  and will not be addressed in such a tone. I knew if Poland chose war she
  chose it because others drove her into war, those others who believed they
  might make their biggest political and financial killing in this war. But
  it will not be their biggest killing, but their biggest disappointment.Poland chose to fight and she received a fight. She chose this fight
  light-heartedly because certain statesmen assured her they had detailed proof
  of the worthlessness of Germany and her armed forces, of the inferiority
  of our armament, of the poor morale of our troops, of defeatism within the
  Reich, of a discrepancy between the German people and its leadership.The Poles were persuaded that it would be easy not only to resist but also
  to throw our army back. Poland constructed her campaign on these assurances
  of the Western general staffs. Since then eighteen days have passed, and
  hardly elsewhere in history can the following be said with more truth: The
  Lord has struck them down with horse, with man and with wagon.As I speak to you our troops stand along a great line from Brest-Litovsk
  to Lwow, and at this moment endless columns of the smashed Polish Army have
  been marching as prisoners from that sector since yesterday afternoon. Yesterday
  morning there were 20,000; yesterday afternoon 50,000; this morning 70,000.
  I do not know how great the number is now, but I know one thing: what remains
  of the Polish Army west of that line will capitulate within a few days, they
  will lay down their arms or be crushed. At this moment, our thankful hearts
  fly to our men. The German Army gave those genius-statesmen, who were so
  well-informed as to conditions within the Reich, a necessary lesson....At this moment we want to give the Polish soldier absolute justice. At many
  points the Pole fought bravely. His lower leadership made desperate efforts,
  his middle-grade leadership was too unintelligent, his highest leadership
  was bad, judged by any standard. His organization was - Polish...I ordered the German Air Force to conduct humanitarian warfare - that is,
  to attack only fighting troops. The Polish Government and army leadership
  ordered the civilian population to carry on the war as francs-tireurs from
  ambush. It is very difficult under these circumstances to hold one's self
  back. I want to stress that the democratic States should not imagine it must
  be that way. If they want it otherwise, they can have it otherwise. My patience
  can have limits here also. . . .So, we have beaten Poland within eighteen days and thus created a situation
  which perhaps makes it possible one day to speak to representatives of the
  Polish people calmly and reasonably.Meantime, Russia felt moved, on its part, to march in for the protection
  of the interests of the White Russian and Ukrainian people in Poland. We
  realize now that in England and France this German and Russian co-operation
  is considered a terrible crime. An Englishman even wrote that it is perfidious
  - well, the English ought to know. I believe England thinks this co-operation
  perfidious because the co-operation of democratic England with bolshevist
  Russia failed, while National Socialist Germany's attempt with Soviet Russia
  succeeded.I want to give here an explanation: Russia remains what she is; Germany also
  remain what she is. About only one thing are both regimes clear: neither
  the German nor the Russian regime wants to sacrifice a single man for the
  interest of the Western democracies. A lesson of four years was sufficient
  for both peoples. We know only too well that alternately, now one then the
  other, would be granted the honor to fill the breach for the ideals of the
  Western democracies.We therefore thank both peoples and both States for this task. We intend
  henceforth to look after our interests ourselves, and we have found that
  we best have been able to look after them when two of the largest peoples
  and States reconcile each other. And this is made simpler by the fact that
  the British assertion as to the unlimited character of German foreign policy
  is a lie. I am happy now to be able to refute this lie for British statesmen.
  British statesmen, who continually maintain that Germany intends to dominate
  Europe to the Urals now will be pleased to learn the limits of German political
  intentions. I believe this will deprive them of a reason for war because
  they profess to have to fight against the present regime because it today
  pursues unlimited political goals.Now, gentlemen of the great British Empire, the aims of Germany are closely
  limited. We discussed the matter with Russia - they, after all, are the most
  immediately interested neighbor - and if you are of the opinion that we might
  come to a conflict on the subject - we will not.Britain ought to welcome the fact that Germany and Soviet Russia have come
  to an understanding, for this understanding means the elimination of that
  nightmare which kept British statesmen from sleeping because they were so
  concerned over the ambitions of the present [German] regime to conquer the
  world. It will calm you to learn that Germany does not, and did not, want
  to conquer the Ukraine. We have very limited interests, but we are determined
  to maintain those interests despite all dangers, despite anyone.And that we did not permit ourselves to be trifled with in those past eighteen
  days may have been proved sufficiently. How a definite settlement of State
  conditions in this conflict will look depends first and foremost upon the
  two countries which there have their most important vital interests.Germany has there limited but unalterable claims, and she will realize those
  claims one way or another. Germany and Russia will put in place the hotbed
  of conflict in the European situation which later will be valued only as
  a relaxation of tension.If the Western Powers now declare that this must not be, under any circumstances,
  and if especially England declares that she is determined to oppose this
  in a three- or five- or eight-year war, then I want to say something in reply:Firstly, Germany, by extensive yielding and renunciation in the west and
  south of the Reich, has accepted definite boundaries. Germany tried by these
  renunciations to attain lasting pacification. And we believe we would have
  succeeded were it not that certain warmongers could be interested in disturbing
  the European peace.I have neither toward England nor France any war claims, nor has the German
  nation since I assumed power. I tried gradually to establish confidence between
  Germany and especially its former war enemies. I attempted to eliminate all
  tensions which once existed between Germany and Italy, and I may state with
  satisfaction that I fully succeeded.That ever closer and more cordial relations were established was due also
  to personal and human relations between Il Duce and myself. I went still
  further, I tried to achieve the same between Germany and France. Immediately
  after the settlement of the Saar question I solemnly renounced all further
  frontier revisions, not only in theory but in practice. I harnessed all German
  propaganda to this end in order to eliminate everything which might lead
  to doubt or anxiety in Paris.You know of my offers to England. I had only in mind the great goal of attaining
  the sincere friendship of the British people. Since this now has been repulsed,
  and since England today thinks it must wage war against Germany, I would
  like to answer thus:Poland will never rise again in the form of the Versailles Treaty. That is
  guaranteed not only by Germany but also guaranteed by Russia.It is said in England that this war, of course, is not for Poland. That is
  only secondary. More important is the war against the regime in Germany.
  And I receive the honor of special mention as a representative of this regime.
  If that is now set up as a war aim, I will answer the gentlemen in London
  thus:It is for me the greatest honor to be thus classed. On principle I educated
  the German people so that any regime which is lauded by our enemies is poison
  for Germany and will therefore be rejected by us. If, therefore, a German
  regime would get the consent of Churchill, Duff-Cooper and Eden it would
  be paid and kept by these gentlemen and hence would be unbearable for Germany.
  That, certainly, is not true with us. It is, therefore, only honorable for
  us to be rejected by these gentlemen. I can assure these gentlemen only this:
  If they should praise, this would be a reason for me to be most crestfallen.
  I am proud to be attacked by them.But if they believe they can thereby alienate the German people from me,
  then they either think the German people are as lacking in character as
  themselves or as stupid as themselves. They err in both. National Socialism
  did not educate the German people in vain during the past twenty years. We
  are all men who, in their long struggle, have been nothing but attacked.
  That only tended to increase the love of our followers and created an inseparable
  union. And as the National Socialist party took upon itself this years-long
  struggle, finally to win it, thus the National Socialist Reich and the German
  people take up the fight and those gentlemen may be convinced: By their
  ridiculous propaganda the German people will not be undermined. Those bunglers
  will have become our apprentices for many years before they can even attempt
  propaganda.If peoples go to pieces it will not be the German people, who are fighting
  for justice, who have no war aims and who were attacked.Rather, those peoples will break when they gradually find out what their
  misleaders plan, and gradually grasp for what little reason they are fighting,
  and that the only reasons for war are the profits or political interests
  of a very small clique. A part of it declared in Britain that this war will
  last three years. Then I can only say: My sympathies are with the French
  poilu. What he is fighting for he does not know. He knows only that he has
  the honor to fight at least three years. But if it should last three years,
  then the word capitulation will not stand at the end of the third, and at
  the end of the fourth year the word capitulation also will not be, and not
  in the fifth either, and also not in the sixth or seventh year.These gentlemen should take note of the following: Today you have the Germany
  of Frederick the Great before you. These gentlemen can believe this. The
  German people will not split up in this fight but become more unified. If
  anything splits up it will be those States that are not so homogeneous, those
  empires built on the oppression of peoples. We are fighting only for our
  naked beings. We are not able ourselves to be misled by propaganda.Just imagine! There are people who say there are those ruling in another
  land who do not please us, so now we have war with them. Naturally they do
  not carry on the war themselves, but look about for someone to conduct it
  for them. They provide cannon and grenades while others provide grenadiers
  and soldiers. Such an utter lack of conscience!What would be said if one of us should say that the present regime in France
  or Britain does not suit us and consequently we are conducting a war? What
  immeasurable lack of conscience. For that, millions of persons are whipped
  into death. These gentlemen can say that calmly, for they themselves never
  have been on the battlefield for even an hour.But we will see how long they keep nations at war. There can be no doubt
  of one thing. however. We will take up the gauntlet and we will fight as
  the enemy fights. England, with lies and hypocrisy, already has begun to
  fight against women and children. They found a weapon which they think is
  invincible: namely, sea power. And because they cannot be attacked with this
  weapon they think they are justified in making war with it against women
  and children - not only of enemies but also of neutrals if necessary.Let them make no mistake here, however. The moment could come very suddenly
  in which we could use a weapon with which we cannot be attacked. I hope then
  they do not suddenly begin to think of humaneness and of the impossibility
  of waging war against women and children. We Germans do not like that. It
  is not in our nature. In this campaign I gave an order to spare human beings.
  When columns cross a market-place it can occur that someone else becomes
  the victim of attack.In those places where insane or crazy people did not offer resistance not
  one windowpane was broken. In Cracow, except for the air field, railroads
  and the railroad station, which were military objectives, not one bomb fell.
  On the other hand, in Warsaw the war is carried on by civilian shootings
  in all streets and houses. There, of course, the war will take in the whole
  city. We followed these rules and would like to follow them in the future.
  It is entirely up to England to carry out her blockade in a form compatible
  with international law or incompatible with international law. We will adapt
  ourselves thereto.But there should be no doubt about one thing:England's goal is not 'a fight against the regime' but a fight against the
  German people, women and children. Our reaction will be compatible, and one
  thing will be certain: This Germany does not capitulate. We know too well
  what fate would be in store for Germany. Mr. King-Hall [Commander Stephen
  King-Hall, retired naval officer who writes a privately-circulated news letter]
  told us in the name of his masters: A second Versailles, only worse.What can be worse? The first Versailles Treaty was intended to exterminate
  20,000,000 Germans. Thus the second can only realize this intention. We received
  more detailed illustrations of what has been intended, what Poland shall
  have, what crowns will be placed on what heads in France, etc. The German
  people take notice of this and shall fight accordingly. . .We are determined to carry on and stand this war one way or another. We have
  only this one wish, that the Almighty, who now has blessed our arms, will
  now perhaps make other peoples understand and give them comprehension of
  how useless this war, this d=E9b=E2cle of peoples, will be intrinsically,
  and that He may perhaps cause reflection on the blessings of peace which
  they are sacrificing because a handful of fanatic warmongers, persons who
  stand to gain by war, want to involve peoples in war. .Nuremberg -- Speech of September 14, 1936NUREMBERGSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 14, 1936I CAN come to no terms with a Weltanschhauung [bolshevism] which everywhere
  as its first act after gaining power is - not the liberation of the working
  people - but the liberation of the scum of humanity, the asocial creatures
  concentrated in the prisons - and then the letting loose of these wild beasts
  upon the terrified and helpless world about them....Bolshevism turns flourishing countrysides into sinister wastes of ruins;
  National Socialism transforms a Reich of destruction and misery into a healthy
  State and a flourishing economic life....Russia planned a world revolution and German workmen would be used but as
  cannon-fodder for bolshevist imperialism. But we National Socialists do not
  wish that our military resources should be employed to impose by force on
  other peoples what those peoples themselves do not want. Our army does not
  swear on oath that it will with bloodshed extend the National Socialist idea
  over other peoples, but that it will with its own blood defend the National
  Socialist idea and thereby the German Reich, its security and freedom, from
  the aggression of other peoples.... The German people as soldiers is one
  of the best peoples in the world: It would have become a veritable 'Fight
  to the Death Brigade' for the bloody purposes of these international
  disseminators of strife. We have removed this danger, through the National
  Socialist Revolution, from our own people and from other peoples....These are only some of the grounds for the antagonisms which separate us
  from communism. I confess: these antagonisms cannot be bridged. Here are
  really two worlds which do but grow further apart from each other and can
  never unite. When in an English newspaper a Parliamentarian complains that
  we wish to divide Europe into two parts, then unfortunately we are bound
  to inform this Robinson Crusoe living on his happy British island that -
  however unwelcome it may be - this division is already an accomplished fact....
  That one should refuse to see a thing does not mean that it is not there.
  For many a year in Germany I have been laughed to scorn as a prophet; for
  many a year my warnings and my prophecies were regarded as the illusions
  of a mind diseased....Bolshevism has attacked the foundations of our whole human order, alike in
  State and society, the foundations of our conception of civilization, of
  our faith and of our morals: all alike are at stake. If this bolshevism would
  be content to promote this doctrine in a single land, then other countries
  might remain unconcerned, but its supreme principle is its internationalism
  and that means the confession of faith that these views must be carried to
  triumph throughout the whole world, i.e., that the world as we know it must
  be turned upside down. That a British headline-writer refuses to recognize
  this signifies about as much as if in the fifteenth century a humanist in
  Vienna should have refused to admit the intention of Mohammedanism to extend
  its influence in Europe and should have objected that this would be to tear
  the world asunder - to divide it into East and West. Unfortunately I cannot
  escape the impression that most of those who doubt the danger to the world
  of bolshevism come themselves from the East. As yet politicians in England
  have not come to know bolshevism in their own country; we know it already.
  Since I have fought against these Jewish Soviet ideas in Germany, since I
  have conquered and stamped out this peril, I fancy that I possess a better
  comprehension of its character than do men who have only at best had to deal
  with it in the field of literature.... I have won my successes simply because
  in the first place I endeavored to see things as they are and not as one
  would like them to be; secondly, when once I had formed my own opinion I
  never allowed weaklings to talk me out of it or to cause me to abandon it;
  and thirdly, because I was always determined in all circumstances to yield
  to a necessity when once it had been recognized. Today when fate has granted
  me such great successes I will not be disloyal to these funda- mental principles
  of mine..... . .: It is not necessary for me to strengthen the fame of the National
  Socialist Movement, far less that of the German Army, through military triumphs.
  He who is undertaking such great economic and cultural tasks as we are and
  is so determined to carry them through can find his fairest memorial only
  in peace.... But this bolshevism which as we learned only a few months since
  intends to equip its army so that it may with violence, if necessary, open
  the gate to revolution amongst other peoples - this bolshevism should know
  that before the gate of Germany stands the new German Army.... I believe
  that as a National Socialist I appear in the eyes of many bourgeois democrats
  as only a wild man. But as a wild man I still believe myself to be a better
  European, in any event a more sensible one, than they. It is with grave anxiety
  that I see the possibility in Europe of some such development as this: democracy
  may continuously disintegrate the European States, may make them internally
  ever more uncertain in their judgment of the dangers which confront them,
  may above all cripple all power for resolute resistance. Democracy is the
  canal through which bolshevism lets its poisons flow into the separate countries
  and lets them work there long enough for these infections to lead to a crippling
  of intelligence and of the force of resistance. I regard it as possible that
  then - in order to avoid something still worse - coalition governments, masked
  as Popular Fronts or the like, will be formed and that these will endeavor
  to destroy - and perhaps will successfully destroy - in these peoples the
  last forces which remain, either in organization or in mental outlook, which
  could offer opposition to bolshevism.The brutal mass-slaughters of National Socialist fighters, the burning of
  the wives of National Socialist officers after petrol had been poured over
  them, the massacre of children and of babies of National Socialist parents,
  e.g. in Spain, are intended to serve as a warning to forces in other lands
  which represent views akin to those of National Socialism: such forces are
  to be intimidated so that in a similar position they offer no resistance.
  If these methods are successful: if the modern Girondins are succeeded by
  Jacobins, if Kerensky's Popular Front gives place to the Bolshevists, then
  Europe will sink into a sea of blood and mourning....Munich -- Speech of September 16, 1930MUNICHSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 16, 1930. . . THIS election means that the circle is now complete. And the question
  at this time is: what are the aims of this opposition and its leaders?It is a fight for an idea - a Weltanschhauung: and in the forefront stands
  a fundamental principle: Men do not exist for the State, the State exists
  for men. First and far above all else stands the idea of the people: the
  State is a form of organization of this people, and the meaning and the purpose
  of the State are through this form of organization to assure the life of
  the people. And from this there arises a new mode of thought and thus necessarily
  a new political method.We say: a new mode of thought. Today our whole official political outlook
  is rooted in the view that the State must be maintained because the State
  in itself is the essential thing; we, on the other hand, maintain that the
  State in its form has a definite purpose to fulfill and the moment that it
  fails to fulfill its purpose the form stands condemned. Above everything
  stands the purpose to maintain the nation's life - that is the essential
  thing and one should not speak of a law for the protection of the State but
  for the protection of the nation: it is of this protection that one must
  think.... In the place of this rigid formal organization - the State - must
  be set the living organism - the people. Then all action is given a new
  untrammelled freedom: all the formal fetters which can today be imposed on
  men become immoral directly they fail to maintain the people, because that
  is the highest purpose in life and the aim of all reasonable thought and
  action.If today our action employs among its different weapons that of Parliament,
  that is not to say that parliamentary parties exist only for parliamentary
  ends. For us Parliament is not an end in itself, but merely a means to an
  end . . . we are not on principle a parliamentary party - that would be a
  contradiction of our whole outlook - WE ARE A PARLIAMENTARY PARTY BY COMPULSION,
  UNDER CONSTRAINT, AND THAT COMPULSION IS THE CONSTITUTION. The Constitution
  compels us to use this means. It does not compel us to wish for a particular
  goal, it only prescribes a way - a method, and, I repeat, we follow this
  way legally, in accordance with the Constitution: by the way laid down through
  the Constitution we advance towards the purposes which we have set before
  us.Never can Constitutions determine for all time the content of a purpose,
  especially when this content is not identical with the vital rights of a
  people. If today the Constitution admits for its protection laws which are
  headed, 'Laws for the Protection of the Republic,' then it is demonstrated
  that the most which our present Constitution can prescribe is nothing but
  the protection and the maintenance of a form, and that does not touch the
  maintenance of the nation, of a people. This purpose is therefore free: this
  is the goal which we proclaim and to which we shall attain. . .From blood, authority of personality, and a fighting spirit springs that
  value which alone entitles a people to look around with glad hope, and that
  alone is also the condition for the life which men then desire. And when
  that is realized, then that too is realized for which today the political
  parties strive: prosperity, happiness of the individual, family-life, etc.
  First will come honor and then freedom, and from both of these happiness,
  prosperity, life: in a word, that state of things will return which we Germans
  perhaps dimly saw before the War, when individuals can once more live with
  joy in their hearts because life has a meaning and a purpose, because the
  close of life is then not in itself the end, since there will be an endless
  chain of generations to follow: man will know that what we create will not
  sink into Orcus but will pass to his children and to his children's children.
  And so this victory which we have just won is nothing else than the winning
  of a new weapon for our fight.... IT IS NOT FOR SEATS IN PARLIAMENT THAT
  WE FIGHT, BUT WE WIN SEATS IN PARLIAMENT IN ORDER THAT ONE DAY WE MAY BE
  ABLE TO LIBERATE THE GERMAN PEOPLE....Do not write on your banners the word 'Victory': today that word shall be
  uttered for the last time. Strike through the word 'Victory' and write once
  more in its place the word which suits us better - the word 'Fight.'Munich -- Speech of September 18, 1922MUNICHSPEECH OF SEPTEMBER 18, 1922. . . ECONOMICS is a secondary matter. World history teaches us that no people
  became great through economics: it was economics that brought them to their
  ruin. A people died when its race was disintegrated. Germany, too, did not
  become great through economics.A people that in its own life [volkisch] has lost honor becomes politically
  defenseless, and then becomes enslaved also in the economic sphere.Internationalization today means only Judaization. We in Germany have come
  to this: that a sixty-million people sees its destiny to lie at the will
  of a few dozen Jewish bankers. This was possible only because our civilization
  had first been Judaized. The undermining of the German conception of personality
  by catchwords had begun long before. Ideas such as 'Democracy,' 'Majority,'
  'Conscience of the World,' 'World Solidarity,' 'World Peace,' 'Internationality
  of Art,' etc., disintegrate our race-consciousness, breed cowardice, and
  so today we are bound to say that the simple Turk is more man than we are.No salvation is possible until the bearer of disunion, the Jew, has been
  rendered powerless to harm.1. We must call to account the November criminals of 1918. It cannot be that
  two million Germans should have fallen in vain and that afterwards one should
  sit down as friends at the same table with traitors. No, we do not pardon,
  we demand - Vengeance!2. The dishonoring of the nation must cease. For betrayers of their Fatherland
  and informers the gallows is the proper place. Our streets and squares shall
  once more bear the names of our heroes; they shall not be named after Jews.
  In the Question of Guilt we must proclaim the truth.3. The administration of the State must be cleared of the rabble which is
  fattened at the stall of the parties.4. The present laxity in the fight against usury must be abandoned. Here
  the fitting punishment is the same as that for the betrayers of their Fatherland.5. WE MUST DEMAND A GREAT ENLIGHTENMENT ON THE SUBJECT OF THE PEACE TREATY.
  WITH THOUGHTS OF LOVE? NO! BUT IN HOLY HATRED AGAINST THOSE WHO HAVE RUINED
  US.6. The lies which would veil from us our misfortunes must cease. The fraud
  of the present money-madness must be shown up. That will stiffen the necks
  of us all.7. AS FOUNDATION FOR A NEW CURRENCY THE PROPERTY OF THOSE WHO ARE NOT OF
  OUR BLOOD MUST DO SERVICE. If families who have lived in Germany for a thousand
  years are now expropriated, we must do the same to the Jewish usurers.8. WE DEMAND IMMEDIATE EXPULSION OF ALL JEWS WHO HAVE ENTERED GERMANY SINCE
  1914, and of all those, too, who through trickery on the Stock Exchange or
  through other shady transactions have gained their wealth.9. The housing scarcity must be relieved through energetic action; houses
  must be granted to those who deserve them. Eisner said in 1918 that we had
  no right to demand the return of our prisoners - he was only saying openly
  what all Jews were thinking. People who so think must feel how life tastes
  in a concentration camp!Extremes must be fought by extremes. Against the infection of materialism,
  against the Jewish pestilence we must hold aloft a flaming ideal. And if
  others speak of the World and Humanity we say the Fatherland - and only the
  Fatherland!Berlin, Sportpalast -- Speech of October 5, 1938BERLIN, SPORTPALASTSPEECH OF OCTOBER 5, 1938WHEN six years ago I took over the leadership of the Reich one of our so-called
  'statesmen' of that day said: 'Now this man has taken the decisive step.
  Up to now he has been popular, because he has been in opposition. Now he
  must govern and we shall see in six or eight weeks how his popularity will
  look'! Six years - not six weeks only - have passed and I believe that they
  have been the most decisive years for German history. The most characteristic
  feature of this period is the close unity of the German people. What I have
  achieved in these six years was possible only because I had standing behind
  me the whole German people. The problems which faced us no single man could
  solve unaided: only when he could speak and, if necessary, also act in the
  name of the whole German people could he master these questions....During the last few months and weeks I have had in my foreign policy a great
  helper and previously, in my last speech in this hall [the Sportpalast],
  I expressed my thanks to the man who took his stand in support of Germany
  as a true, great friend, Benito Mussolini. He has thrown into the scale of
  a just solution the entire force not only of his own genius but of the power
  which stands behind him. I must also thank the two other great statesmen
  who at the last minute recognized the historical hour, declared themselves
  ready to give their support to the solution of one of Europe's most burning
  problems and who thereby made it possible for me, too, to offer the hand
  towards an understanding. But above all my thanks fly to the German people
  which in these long months has never deserted me. . . .. I am proud of my
  German people! I hope that in a few days the problem of the Sudeten Germans
  will be finally solved. By October 10 we shall have occupied all the areas
  which belong to us. Thus one of Europe's most serious crises will be ended,
  and all of us, not only in Germany but those far beyond our frontiers, will
  then in this year for the first time really rejoice at the Christmas festival.
  It should for us all be a true Festival of Peace....Above us all stands the motto: 'no one in the world will help us if we do
  not help ourselves.' This programme of self-help is a proud and manly programme.
  It is a different programme from that of my predecessors who continually
  ran round through the world, going a-begging now in Versailles, then in Geneva,
  now in Lausanne or at some conference or other elsewhere. It is a prouder
  thing that to-day we Germans are determined to solve our own problems and
  to help ourselves. . . .We have been witnesses of a great turning-point in history. At this moment
  we must bethink ourselves, too, of those who through twenty years in an
  apparently hopeless state still nursed a fanatical faith in Germany and never
  surrendered their *Deutschtum*-their life as Germans. It is so easy here
  in the heart of the Empire to profess one's belief in Germany. But it is
  inexpressibly difficult, in the face of an unceasing persecution, not to
  allow oneself to be drawn away from this faith - to remain fanatically true
  to it, as though redemption were coming the next day. But now the hour of
  redemption has come. I have just had my first sight of these areas and what
  moved me so profoundly was two impressions. First: I have often known the
  jubilation and the enthusiasm of joy, but here for the first time I have
  seen hundreds of thousands shedding tears of joy. And secondly I saw appalling
  distress. When in England a Duff Cooper or a Mr. Eden say that injustice
  has been done to the Czechs, then these men should just for once see what
  in reality has happened there. How can one so pervert the truth! I have seen
  here whole villages undernourished, whole towns reduced to ruin. My
  fellow-countrymen, you have a great debt of honor to pay! . . . I expect
  of you that the Winter Help Contribution of 1938-39 shall correspond with
  the historical greatness of this year.In the history of our people the year 1938 will be a great, incomparable,
  proud year.... Later historians will show that the German nation found its
  way back again to the position of an honourable great nation - that our history
  has once more become a worthy history. . .Berlin, Reichstag -- Speech of October 6, 1939BERLIN, REICHSTAGSPEECH OF OCTOBER 6, 1939IT WAS a fateful hour, on the first of September of this year, when you met
  here as representatives of the German people. I had to inform you then of
  serious decisions which had been forced upon us as a result of the intransigent
  and provocative action of a certain State.Since then five weeks have gone by. I have asked you to come here today in
  order to give you an account of what has passed, the necessary insight into
  what is happening at present and, so far as that is possible, into the future
  as well.For the last two days our towns and villages have been decorated with flags
  and symbols of the new Reich. Bells are ringing to celebrate a great victory,
  which, of its kind, is unique in history. A State of no less than 36,000,000
  inhabitants, with an army of almost fifty infantry and cavalry divisions,
  took up arms against us. Their arms were far-reaching, their confidence in
  their ability to crush Germany knew no bounds.After one week of fighting there could no longer be any doubt as to the outcome.
  Whenever Polish troops met German units, they were driven back or dispersed.
  Poland's ambitious strategy for a great offensive against the territory of
  the Reich collapsed within the first forty-eight hours of the campaign.
  Death-defying in attack, advancing at an unconquerable rate of progress,
  infantry, armored detachments, air force and units of the navy were soon
  dictating the course of events.They were masters of the situation throughout the campaign. In a fortnight's
  time the major part of the Polish Army was either scattered, captured, or
  surrounded. In the meantime, however, the German Army had covered distances
  and occupied regions which twenty-five years ago would have taken over fourteen
  months to conquer.Even though a number of peculiarly gifted newspaper strategists in other
  parts of the world attempted to describe the pace at which this campaign
  progressed as not coming up to Germany's expectations, we ourselves all know
  that in all history there has scarcely been a comparable military achievement.That the last remnants of the Polish Army were able to hold out in Warsaw,
  Modlin, and on Hela Peninsula until October 1 was not due to their prowess
  in arms, but only to our cool thinking and our sense of responsibility.I forbade the sacrifice of more human lives than was absolutely necessary.
  That is to say, I deliberately released the German Supreme Command from adherence
  to a principle still observed in the Great War demanding that for the sake
  of prestige certain objectives must under all circumstances be reached within
  a certain time limit.Everything which it is imperative to do will be done regardless of sacrifice,
  but what can be avoided will not be done.There would have been no difficulty for us in breaking the resistance of
  Warsaw between the 10th and 12th of September, just as we finally broke it
  September 25-27, only that in the first place I wanted to spare German lives
  and in the second place I still clung to the hope, misdirected though it
  was, that the Polish side might for once be guided by responsible common
  sense instead of by irresponsible lunacy. But in this instance we were once
  more confronted with the spectacle which we had witnessed before on the largest
  possible scale.The attempt to convince the responsible Polish command - in so far as it
  existed - that it was futile and in fact insane to attempt resistance, especially
  in a city of more than a million inhabitants, proved entirely fruitless.
  A 'generalissimo,' who himself took to inglorious flight, forced upon the
  capital of his country a resistance which could never lead to anything but
  its destruction.Since it was realized that Warsaw's fortifications alone were not likely
  to withstand the German attack, the entire city was converted into a fortress
  and barricaded in every direction. Batteries were mounted in every square
  and great courtyard, thousands of machine-gun posts manned and the whole
  population called up to take part in the fighting.Sheer sympathy for women and children caused me to make an offer to those
  in command of Warsaw at least to let civilian inhabitants leave the city.
  I declared a temporary armistice and safeguards necessary for evacuation,
  with the result that we all waited for emissaries just as fruitlessly as
  we had waited at the end of August for a Polish negotiator. The proud Polish
  commander of the city did not even condescend to reply.To make sure, I extended the time limit and ordered bombers and heavy artillery
  to attack only military objectives, repeating my proposal in vain. I thereupon
  made an offer that the whole suburb of Praga would not be bombarded at all,
  but should be reserved for the civilian population in order to make it possible
  for them to take refuge there.This proposal, too, was treated with contempt on the part of the Poles. Twice
  I attempted to evacuate at least the international colony from the city.
  In this I finally succeeded after great difficulties, in the case of the
  Russian colony, actually at the last moment. I then ordered a general attack
  on the city for September 25.The same defenders who at first considered it beneath their dignity even
  to reply to my humane proposals, made on grounds of humanity, then very rapidly
  changed face. The German attack opened on September 25, and Warsaw capitulated
  on the 27th.With 120,000 men the defenders did not even attempt to break through as our
  German General Litzmann once did at Brzesiny with a vastly inferior force,
  but, on the contrary, preferred to lay down arms.Any comparison with the Alcazar is entirely out of place. There for weeks
  on end Spanish heroes defied the bitterest attacks and earned a right to
  lasting fame. Here, on the other hand, a great city was unscrupulously exposed
  to destruction, only to capitulate after a forty-eight-hour assault.The Polish soldiers as individuals fought bravely on many occasions, but
  their officers, beginning with the command, can only be described as
  irresponsible, unconscientious and inefficient. Before the bombardment of
  Hela I had also given orders that not a single man should be sacrificed until
  the most careful preparation for action had been made. There, too, surrender
  came at the very moment when the Germans had at length announced their intention
  of attacking and had begun to do so.I have made these statements, gentlemen, with the object of forestalling
  the invention of historical legends, for if legend is to be woven around
  any who took part in this campaign, it should be woven around German soldiers
  who, during the attack and on the march, added yet another page to their
  immortal glorious record.Legends could be woven, too, around the heavy artillery which performed untold
  feats of endurance in rushing to the assistance of the infantry. Men of our
  armored mechanized units who, with dauntless courage and heedless of
  counterattacks and numerical superiority of the enemy, attacked again and
  again are worthy of this legend.Such a legend should also immortalize the airmen who, fearless of death and
  knowing that if anti-aircraft fire did not kill them in the air, they would,
  if forced to make a parachute landing, inevitably suffer frightful death,
  continued with steadfast courage to carry out reconnaissance flights and
  attacks with bombs or machine-gun fire whenever they were commanded to do
  so and whenever they found objectives.The same is true of the brave men of our submarine fleet. If, within four
  weeks, we totally annihilated a State with a population of 36,000,000 and
  corresponding military strength, and if during this whole period our victorious
  arms have not suffered a single setback, this cannot be ascribed simply to
  good luck but constituted certain proof of fine training, excellent leadership,
  and indomitable courage.Our knowledge of the strength of our fighting forces fills us all with a
  well of confidence, for they have not only proved that they are strong in
  attack, but also that they are strong in retaining what they have won. The
  excellent training received by the individual officers and men has been amply
  justified. It is this training which is responsible for the extremely few
  casualties which - hard as they are for the individual to bear - are on the
  whole far less than we ventured to expect.Admittedly the total number of casualties gives no idea of the severity of
  the various encounters, for certain regiments and divisions suffered very
  heavy losses when they were attacked by Polish forces which were numerically
  superior or came into conflict with such forces when they themselves were
  attacking....As I am now about to make known to you the number of our dead and wounded,
  I request that you rise from your seats. Though owing to the training given
  our troops, the effectiveness of our weapons and the command of our forces
  the figures do not amount to even one-twentieth of what our apprehensions
  had been at the outset of the campaign, we will never forget that every soldier
  who fell fighting brought for his people and our Reich the greatest sacrifice
  that man can bring.According to the casualty list of up to September 30, 1939, which will not
  change materially, the total losses for the army, navy and air force, including
  officers, are as follows: 10,572 killed; 30,322 wounded; 3,404 missing.
  Unfortunately, of those missing a certain number who fell into Polish hands
  will probably be found to have been massacred and killed.All our gratitude is due to the victims of the campaign in Poland, while
  the wounded may be assured of our best attention and care, and the families
  of those killed of our sympathy and help.By the capitulation of the fortresses of Warsaw and Modlin and the surrender
  of Hela, the Polish campaign has come to an end. The task of safeguarding
  the country against vagabonding marauders, gangs of robbers and individual
  groups of terrorists will be carried through with all energy.The outcome of the war was the annihilation of all Polish armies, followed
  by the dissolution of the Polish State. Six hundred and ninety-four thousand
  prisoners have set out on their march to Berlin. The amount of war material
  captured cannot yet be estimated.Since the outbreak of the war, the German forces have at the same time in
  calm preparedness taken up positions in the West ready to meet the enemy.The naval forces of the Reich have fulfilled their duty in the attack on
  the Westerplatte, Gdynia, Oxhoeft and Hela, and in protecting the Baltic
  Sea and the German North Sea coast our submarines are fighting in a spirit
  worthy of the memory of our heroes in the last war.In the face of this historically unprecedented collapse of a structure purporting
  to be a State, the question in almost everybody's mind is as to the reason
  for such a phenomenon.Versailles was the cradle of a Polish State which had emerged from the untold
  sacrifice of blood - not of Polish but of German and Russian blood. Poland,
  who for centuries past had proved herself incapable of existence, was in
  1916 artificially begotten and in 1919 no less artificially born by a German
  government just as incapable of existence.In utter disregard of almost 500 years of experience, without consideration
  for the lesson of historical development during many centuries, without
  appreciation for ethnographic conditions and with no regard for all economic
  expediencies, a State was constructed at Versailles which, according to its
  whole nature, was sooner or later bound to become the cause of a most serious
  crisis.A man who, I am sorry to say, now ranks among our fiercest enemies, at that
  time clearly foresaw all this. I mean Mr. Lloyd George. Like so many others
  he sounded warning, not only at the time of the creation of that structure
  but also in the course of its subsequent expansion which had taken place
  in utter disregard of reason and right.At that time he expressed apprehension that in that State an accumulation
  of conditions was being created containing the risk of conflicts which sooner
  or later might lead to great European complications.As a matter of fact, conditions surrounding the structure of this new so-called
  State, as far as its nationalities were concerned, could not be clarified
  until now. It requires some knowledge of Polish census methods to realize
  how utterly alien to truth, and therefore irrelevant, statistics on the national
  composition of that territory were and are.In 1919 the Poles laid claims to the territory where they pretended to have
  a majority of 95 per cent - in East Prussia, for instance - whereas a plebiscite
  later showed the Poles actually had reached a figure of 2 per cent.In the State finally created, which contained parts of former Russia, Austria,
  and Germany, non-Polish elements were so brutally ill-treated, suppressed,
  tyrannized and tortured that any plebiscite depended entirely on the good
  will of local administrative officials for producing such results as were
  desired or demanded.Nor did indisputable Polish elements receive much better recognition. And
  then, on top of all this, statesmen of our Western Hemisphere spoke of this
  kind of creation as of democracy of the fundamentals of their own system.In that country there ruled a minority of aristocratic or non-aristocratic
  large, vast estate-owners and wealthy intellectuals to whom under the most
  favorable circumstances their own Polish compatriots were nothing but mass
  man power. For that reason the regime was never backed by more than 15 per
  cent of the total population.The economic distress and low cultural level corresponded with these conditions.
  In 1919 this State took over from Prussia and also from Austria provinces
  which had been developed through hundreds of years of hard toil, some of
  them being in a most flourishing condition. Today, after the elapse of twenty
  years, they are at a point of gradually turning into steppes again.The Vistula, the river whose estuary has always been of such tremendous
  importance for the Polish Government, owing to the lack of any and all care
  is now already unsuitable for any real traffic and, depending on the season,
  is either an unruly stream or a dried-up rivulet.Towns as well as villages are in a state of neglect. The roads, with very
  few exceptions, are badly out of repair and in a terrible condition. Anyone
  who travels in that country for two or three weeks will get the proper idea
  of the classical German term 'Polnische Wirtschaft,' meaning a 'Polish state
  of affairs!'In spite of the unbearable conditions prevailing in that country, Germany
  endeavored to establish peaceful relations with it. During the years 1933
  and 1934 I endeavored to find some equitable compromise between our national
  interests and our desire for the maintenance of peace with that country.
  There was a time, when Marshal Pilsudski was still alive, when it seemed
  possible for this hope to materialize were it only to a modest extent.Unlimited patience and still greater self-restraint were called for because
  many of the regional Polish administrative officials took the understanding
  between Germany and Poland to be merely a license for the persecution and
  annihilation of the Germans in Poland with even less risk. In the few years
  up to 1922 more than one-and-a-half million Germans had been forced to leave
  their homes. They were hunted out, often without being able to take even
  their most necessary clothing.When, in 1938, the Olsa territory went to Poland, they used the same methods
  against the Czechs who lived there. Often within a few hours many thousands
  of these had to leave their working places, their homes, their villages and
  towns at the shortest notice without being allowed to take anything more
  with them than a suitcase or a little box with clothing.Things like this went on for years, and for years we looked on, always striving
  to attain some improvement in the lot of the unhappy Germans living there
  by establishing closer relations. It was, however, impossible to overlook
  the fact that every German attempt thereby to secure the removal of these
  intolerable conditions was taken by the Polish rulers to be nothing more
  than a sign of weakness, if not of stupidity.When the Polish Government proceeded in a thousand ways gradually to subjugate
  Danzig as well, I endeavored, by means of practical proposals, to secure
  a solution whereby Danzig, in accordance with the wishes of its population,
  could be nationally and politically united with Germany without impairing
  the economic needs and so-called rights of Poland. If today any one alleges
  that these were ultimative demands, that allegation is a lie.The proposals for a solution, as communicated to the Polish Government in
  March, 1939, were nothing but the suggestions and the ideas already discussed
  long ago between myself and Polish Foreign Minister Beck, except for the
  fact that in the spring of 1939 I thought I would be able to facilitate the
  acceptance of these proposals by the Polish Government in the face of their
  own public opinion by the offer to concede to them an equivalent.The fact that the Polish Government at that time refused to consider a discussion
  of these proposals was due to two reasons: for one thing, the inflamed chauvinist
  powers behind the Government never intended to solve the problem of Danzig,
  but on the contrary already lived in the hope, expounded later in publications
  and speeches, of acquiring territory from the Reich far beyond the bounds
  of Danzig; in fact, they hoped to be in a position to attack and conquer.'These aims, far from stopping, at East Prussia, were climaxed by a flood
  of publications and a continuous sequence of speeches, addresses, resolutions,
  etc., in addition to the incorporation of East Prussia, for the annexation
  of Pomerania and Silesia. The Oder represented the minimum of frontier claims
  and finally even the Elbe was described as the natural dividing line between
  Germany and Poland.These demands, which today may appear crazy but which were then presented
  with fanatical seriousness, were based in a simply ridiculous manner on the
  assumption of a 'Polish mission of civilization' and declared justified because
  they were supposed to be capable of fulfillment in view of the strength of
  the Polish Army.While I was inviting the then Polish Foreign Minister to take part in a
  conference for the discussion of our proposals, the Polish military generals
  were already writing about the inefficiency of the German Army, the cowardice
  of the German soldiers, the inferiority of the German weapons, the obvious
  superiority of the Polish forces and the certainty, in case of war, of defeating
  the Germans at the gates of Berlin and of annihilating the Reich.The man, however, who intended, as he expressed it, to hack the German Army
  to pieces at the gates of Berlin, was not just an illiterate, insignificant
  Pole but their commander-in-chief, Rydz-Smigly, who at present resides in
  Rumania.Violations and insults which Germany and her armed forces had to put up with
  from these military dilettantes would never have been tolerated by any other
  State, just as they were not expected from any other nation. No French or
  English generals would ever have presumed to express a judgment of the German
  armed forces similar to that which we heard read from the Polish side for
  years, particularly since March, 1939; and on the other hand no German general
  would have spoken in that manner of English, French or Italian soldiers.A great deal of self-control was needed to keep calm in face of these simply
  shameless insults, in spite of the fact that we knew that the German armed
  forces could destroy and sweep away the whole of this ridiculous State and
  its army within a few weeks.But this attitude, for which the Polish leaders themselves were responsible,
  was the fundamental reason why the Polish Government refused even to discuss
  the German proposals.Another reason was that fatal promise of guarantee given to the State which,
  although not menaced at all, very rapidly became convinced it could afford
  to challenge a Great Power without risk once it was assured of the support
  of two Great Powers, perhaps even hoping this way to lay the foundation for
  realization of all its own insane ambitions.For, as soon as Poland felt certain of that guarantee, minorities living
  in that country had to suffer what amounted to a reign of terror. I do not
  consider it my task to speak of the lot of the Ukrainians, or White Russian
  population, whose interests now lie in the hands of Russia.However, I do feel it my duty to speak of the lot of those helpless thousands
  of Germans who carried on the tradition of those who first brought culture
  to that country centuries ago and whom the Poles now began to oppress and
  drive out. Since March, 1939, they had been victims of truly satanic
  terrorization. How many of them had been abducted and where they are cannot
  be stated even today.Villages with hundreds of German inhabitants are now left without men because
  they all have been killed. In others women were violated and murdered, girls
  and children outraged and killed. In 1598 an Englishman - Sir George Carew
  - wrote in his diplomatic reports to the English Government that the outstanding
  features of Polish character were cruelty and lack of moral restraint.Since that time this cruelty has not changed. Just as tens of thousands of
  Germans were slaughtered and sadistically tormented to death, so German soldiers
  captured in fighting were tortured and massacred.This pet lapdog of the Western democracies cannot be considered a cultured
  nation at all.For more than four years I fought in the great war on the Western Front,
  but such things did not happen on either side.Things that have occurred in Poland, in the past few months, and especially
  the last four weeks, constitute flaming accusations against those responsible
  for the creation of a so-called State lacking every national, historical,
  cultural, and moral foundation. Had only 1 per cent of these atrocities been
  committed in any part of the world against the English people, I should be
  interested to see the indignation of those gentlemen who today in hypocritical
  horror condemn the German or Russian procedure.No! To grant guarantees to this State and this Government as was done could
  only lead to appalling disasters. Neither the Polish Government, nor the
  small cliques supporting it, nor the Polish nation as such were capable of
  measuring the responsibilities which were implied in such guarantees in Poland's
  favor by half of Europe.The passionate sentiment thus aroused, together with the sense of that security
  which had been unconditionally guaranteed to them, counted for the behavior
  of the Polish Government during the period between April and August this
  year.It was also the cause of the attitude they adopted toward my conciliatory
  proposals. The Government rejected these proposals because they felt themselves
  protected, or even encouraged, by public opinion and public opinion protected
  them and encouraged them on their way because it had been left in ignorance
  by its Government and particularly because in its every action it felt itself
  sufficiently protected from without.All this led to an increase in the number of appalling atrocities committed
  against German nationals in Poland and to the rejection of all proposals
  for a solution and in the end to the steadily growing encroachments on actual
  Reich territory. It was quite comprehensible that such a state of mind
  interpreted German longsuffering as a weakness, that is, that every concession
  on Germany's part was regarded as proof of the possibility of some further
  aggressive steps.A warning given Poland to refrain from sending Danzig any more notes amounting
  to ultimata and above all to desist from economic strangulation of that city
  did not ease the situation in the least; it resulted, in fact, in complete
  stoppage of all Danzig means of communication.The warning to suspend or at least to take steps against the unceasing cases
  of murder, ill treatment and torture of German nationals in Poland had the
  effect of increasing these atrocities and of calling for more bloodthirsty
  harangues and provocative speeches from the Polish local administrative officials
  and military authorities.The German proposals aiming at a last-minute agreement on a just and equitable
  basis were answered by a general mobilization. The German request that an
  intermediary should be sent, founded on a proposal made by Great Britain,
  was not complied with and on the second day was answered by an offensive
  declaration.Under these circumstances it was obvious that if further incursions into
  the Reich's territory occurred, Germany's patience would be at an end. What
  the Poles had erroneously interpreted as weakness was in reality our sense
  of responsibility and my firm determination to come to an understanding if
  that at all was possible.Since they believed that this patience and longsuffering was a sign of weakness
  which would allow them to do anything, no other course remained than to show
  them their mistake by striking back with the weapons which they themselves
  had used for years.Under these blows their State has crumbled to pieces in a few weeks and is
  now swept from the earth. One of the most senseless deeds perpetrated at
  Versailles is thus a thing of the past.If this step on Germany's part has resulted in a community of interests with
  Russia, that is due not only to the similarity of the problems affecting
  the two States, but also to that of the conclusions which both States had
  arrived at with regard to their future relationship.In my speech at Danzig I already declared that Russia was organized on principles
  which differ from those held in Germany. However, since it became clear that
  Stalin found nothing in the Russian-Soviet principles which should prevent
  him from cultivating friendly relations with States of a different political
  creed, National Socialist Germany sees no reason why she should adopt another
  criterion. The Soviet Union is the Soviet Union, National Socialist Germany
  is National Socialist Germany.But one thing is certain: from the moment when the two States mutually agreed
  to respect each other's distinctive regime and principles, every reason for
  any mutually hostile attitude had disappeared. Long periods in the history
  of both nations have shown that the inhabitants of these two largest States
  in Europe were never happier than when they lived in friendship with each
  other. The Great War, which once made Germany and Russia enemies, was disastrous
  for both countries.It is easy to understand that the capitalist States of the West are interested
  today in playing off these two States and their principles against each other.
  For this purpose, and until it is realized, they certainly regard the Soviet
  Union as a sufficiently respectable partner for the conclusion of a useful
  military pact. But they regard it as perfidy that their honorable approaches
  were rejected and in their place rapprochement took place between those two
  very powers who had every reason for seeking happiness for their respective
  peoples in developing their economic relationship along the lines of peaceful
  co-operation.Months ago I stated in the Reichstag that the conclusion of the German-Russian
  non-aggression pact marked the turning point in the whole German foreign
  policy. The new pact of friendship and mutual interest since signed between
  Germany and the Soviet Union will insure not only peace but a constant
  satisfactory co-operation for both States.Germany and Russia together will relieve one of the most acute danger spots
  in Europe of its threatening character and will, each in her own sphere,
  contribute to the welfare of the peoples living there, thus aiding to European
  peace in general. If certain circles today see in this pact either the breakdown
  of Russia or Germany - as suits them best - I should like to give them my
  answer.For many years imaginary aims were attributed to Germany's foreign policy
  which at best might be taken to have arisen in the mind of a schoolboy.At a moment when Germany is struggling to consolidate her own living space,
  which only consists of a few hundred thousand square kilometers, insolent
  journalists in countries which rule over 40,000,000 square kilometers state
  Germany is aspiring to world domination!German-Russian agreements should prove immensely comforting to these worried
  sponsors of universal liberty, for do they not show most emphatically that
  their assertions as to Germany's aiming at d domination of the Urals, the
  Ukraine, Rumania, etc., are only excrescences of their own unhealthy war-lord
  fantasy?In one respect it is true Germany's decision is irrevocable, namely in her
  intention to see peaceful, stable, and thus tolerable conditions introduced
  on her eastern frontiers; also it is precisely here that Germany's interests
  and desires correspond entirely with those of the Soviet Union. The two States
  are resolved to prevent problematic conditions arising between them which
  contain germs of internal unrest and thus also of external disorder and which
  might perhaps in any way unfavorably affect the relationship of these two
  great States with one another.Germany and the Soviet Union have therefore clearly defined the boundaries
  of their own spheres of interest with the intention of being singly responsible
  for law and order and preventing everything which might cause injury to the
  other partner.The aims and tasks which emerge from the collapse of the Polish State are,
  insofar as the German sphere of interest is concerned, roughly as follows:1. Demarcation of the boundary for the Reich, which will do justice to
  historical, ethnographical and economic facts.2. Pacification of the whole territory by restoring a tolerable measure of
  peace and order.3. Absolute guarantees of security not only as far as Reich territory is
  concerned but for the entire sphere of interest.4. Re-establishment and reorganization of economic life and of trade and
  transport, involving development of culture and civilization.5. As the most important task, however, to establish a new order of ethnographic
  conditions, that is to say, resettle ment of nationalities in such a manner
  that the process ultimately results in the obtaining of better dividing lines
  than is the case at present. In this sense, however, it is not a case of
  the problem being restricted to this particular sphere, but of a task with
  far wider implications for the east and south of Europe are to a large extent
  filled with splinters of the German nationality, whose existence they cannot
  maintain.In their very existence lie the reason and cause for continual international
  disturbances. In this age of the principle of nationalities and of racial
  ideals, it is utopian to believe that members of a highly developed people
  can be assimilated without trouble.It is therefore essential for a far-sighted ordering of the life of Europe
  that a resettlement should be undertaken here so as to remove at least part
  of the material for European conflict. Germany and the Union of Soviet Republics
  have come to an agreement to support each other in this matter.The German Government will, therefore, never allow the residual Polish State
  of the future to become in any sense a disturbing factor for the Reich itself
  and still less a source of disturbance between the German Reich and Soviet
  Russia.As Germany and Soviet Russia undertake this work of re-establishment, the
  two States are entitled to point out that the attempt to solve this problem
  by the methods of Versailles has proved an utter failure. In fact it had
  to fail because these tasks cannot be settled sitting around a table or by
  simple decrees. Most of the statesmen who in Versailles had to decide on
  these complicated problems did not possess the slightest historical training,
  indeed they often had not even the vaguest idea of the nature of the task
  with which they were faced.Neither did they bear any responsibility for the consequences of their action.
  Recognition that their work might be faulty was of no significance because
  in practice there was no way for a real revision. It is true that in the
  Treaty of Versailles provision was made for keeping open the possibility
  of such revisions but in reality all attempts to attain such a revision
  miscarried and they were bound to miscarry because the League of Nations
  as the competent authority was no longer morally justified to carry out such
  a procedure.After America had been first to refuse to ratify the Treaty of Versailles,
  or to join the League of Nations, and later when other countries also felt
  they could no longer reconcile their presence in this organization with the
  interests of their respective countries, the League degenerated more and
  more into a clique of parties interested in the Versailles dictate.At any rate it is a fact that none of the revisions recognized from the outset
  as necessary had ever been effected by the League of Nations.Since in our time it became customary to regard a refugee government as still
  existing even if it consists of three members provided they have taken with
  them sufficient gold so as not to be an economic burden to the democratic
  country offering hospitality, it may be assumed that the League of Nations,
  too, will carry on bravely if but two nations sit there together. Perhaps
  even one will do!But according to the government of the League any revision of the Versailles
  clauses would still be adjudicated exclusively by this illustrious organization
  - that is, in other words, revision would be practically impossible.The League of Nations is not living but already a dead thing, nevertheless
  the peoples concerned are not dead but alive and they will uphold their vital
  interests, however incapable the League of Nations may be of seeing, grasping,
  or respecting those interests.National Socialism is not a phenomenon which has grown up in Germany with
  the malicious intent of thwarting League efforts at revision, but a movement
  which arose because for fifteen years the most natural human and social rights
  of a great nation had been suppressed and denied redress.And I personally take exception at seeing foreign states- men stand up and
  call me guilty of having broken my word because I have now put these revisions
  through.On the contrary I pledged my sacred word to the German people to do away
  with the Treaty of Versailles and to restore to them their natural and vital
  rights as a great nation.The extent to which I am securing these vital rights is modest.This I ask: If forty-six million Englishmen claim the right to rule over
  forty million square kilometers of the earth, it cannot be wrong for eighty-two
  million Germans to demand the right to live on 800,000 square kilometers,
  to till their fields and to follow their trades and callings, and if they
  further demand the restitution of those colonial possessions which formerly
  were their property, which they had not taken away from anybody by robbery
  or war but honestly acquired by purchase, exchange and treaties. Moreover,
  in all my demands, I always first tried to obtain revisions by way of
  negotiation.I did, it is true, refuse to submit the question of German vital rights to
  some non-competent international body in the form of humble requests. Just
  as little as I suppose that Great Britain would plead for respect of her
  vital interests, so little ought one to expect the same of National Socialist
  Germany. I have, however, and I must emphasize this fact most solemnly, limited
  in the extreme the measure of these revisions of the Versailles Treaty.Notably in all those cases where I did not see any menace to the natural,
  vital interests of my people, I have myself advised the German nation to
  hold back. Yet these eighty million people must live somewhere. There exists
  a fact that not even the Versailles Treaty has been able to destroy; although
  it has in the most unreasonable manner dissolved States, torn asunder regions
  economically connected, cut communication lines, etc., yet the people, the
  living substance of flesh and blood, has remained and will forever remain
  in the future.It cannot be denied that since the German people has found its resurrection
  through National Socialism, the relation existing between Germany and the
  surrounding nations has been cleared up to a great extent.The uncertainty that today is weighing down the common life of nations is
  not due to German demands, but to the malignant insinuations published in
  the so-called democracies.The German demands themselves were formulated in a very clear and precise
  way. They have, it is true, found their fulfillment not thanks to the insight
  of the League of Nations but thanks to the dynamics of natural development.The aim of the German foreign policy as pursued by me has never been other
  than to guarantee the existence - that is to say, the life - of the German
  people, to remove the injustice and nonsense contained in a treaty which
  not only destroyed Germany economically but has drawn the victor nations
  into disaster as well.For the rest, however, our whole work of rebuilding was concerned with the
  home affairs of the Reich and no country in the world had a greater longing
  for peace than the German people. It was fortunate for humanity and no misfortune
  at all that I succeeded in removing the craziest, most impossible clauses
  of the Versailles Treaty by peaceful methods and without compromising foreign
  statesmen in the internal politics of their countries.That some details of this action may have been painful to certain interested
  parties is comprehensible. But the merit is all the greater for the fact
  that this reorganization was brought about without bloodshed in all cases
  but the last one.The last revision of this treaty could have been brought about in exactly
  the same peaceful way had not two circumstances I have mentioned had the
  contrary effect. That is chiefly the fault of those who not only tool; no
  pleasure in the former peaceful revision, but on the contrary com- plained
  of the fact that by peaceful methods a new Central Europe was being built
  up; that is to say, a Central Europe that was able once more to give its
  inhabitants work and bread.As I have already mentioned, it was one of the aims of the Government of
  the Reich to clear up the relation between ourselves and our neighbors. Allow
  me to point out some facts that cannot be refuted by the scribblings of
  international press liars.First. Germany has concluded non-aggression pacts with the Baltic States.
  Her interests there are of an exclusively economic nature.Second. In former times Germany never had any conflict of interests or indeed
  litigation points with the Northern States and she has none today either.Third. Germany has taken no steps in regard to the German territory handed
  over to Denmark under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles; she has, on
  the contrary, established local and friendly relations with Denmark. We have
  claimed no revision, but we have concluded a non-aggression pact with Denmark.
  Our relations with that country are thus directed toward unswervingly loyal
  and friendly co-operation.Fourth. Holland: the new Reich has endeavored to continue the traditional
  friendship with Holland; it did not take over any differences between the
  two States nor did it create new ones.Fifth. Belgium: immediately after I had taken over the Government I tried
  to establish friendly relations with Belgium. 1 renounced any revision as
  well as any desire for revision. The Reich has put forward no claim which
  might in any way have been regarded as a threat to Belgium.Sixth. Switzerland: Germany adopted the same attitude toward Switzerland.
  The Reich Government has never given the slightest cause for doubt regarding
  their desires to establish friendly relations with the country. Moreover,
  they themselves have never brought forward any complaint regarding the relations
  between the two countries.Seventh. Immediately after the Anschluss [with Austria] became an accomplished
  fact, I informed Yugoslavia that the frontier in common with that country
  would henceforth be regarded as unalterable by Germany and that we wished
  only to live in peace and friendship with that country.Eighth. The bond which binds us to Hungary is old and traditional, one of
  close and sincere friendship. In this instance, too, our frontiers are
  unalterable.Ninth. Slovakia appealed to Germany of her own accord for assistance in
  connection with her establishment as a State. Her independence is recognized
  and not infringed upon by the Reich.Tenth. However, it is not only with these states but also with the Great
  Powers that Germany has improved and settled those relations which to a certain
  extent had been adversely affected by the Treaty of Versailles.My first step was to bring about an alteration in the relations between Italy
  and the Reich. The existing frontiers between these two States have been
  formally recognized as unalterable by both countries. Any possibility of
  a clash of interests of a territorial nature has been removed. One-time enemies
  during the World War, they have in the meantime become sincere friends.Establishment of friendly relations was not the final development, but, in
  the periods which followed, this led to the signing of a cordial pact based
  on our mutual philosophies and political interests which has proved itself
  to be an important factor in European co-operation.My chief endeavor, however, has been to rid our relations with France of
  all trace of ill will and render them tolerable for both nations. I once
  set forth with the utmost clarity Germany's claims in this domain and have
  never gone back on that declaration. Return of the Saar territory was one
  demand which I regarded as an indispensable pre-condition of Franco-German
  understandings.After France herself had found a just solution of this problem, Germany had
  no further claims against France. No such claim exists any longer and no
  such claim shall ever be put forward. That is to say, I have refused even
  to mention the problem of Alsace-Lorraine not because I was forced to keep
  silent, but because this matter does not constitute a problem which could
  ever interfere with Franco-German relations.I accepted the decision made in 1919 and refused to consider ever embarking
  upon war for the sake of a question which, comparatively speaking, is of
  slight importance for Germany's vital interests, but which is certainly likely
  to involve every second generation in a deadly war fear. France realized
  this.It is impossible for any French statesman to get up and declare I have ever
  made any demands upon France the fulfillment of which would be incompatible
  with French honor or French interest. It is, however, true that instead of
  demands I have always expressed to France my desire to bury forever our ancient
  enmity and bring together these two nations, both of which have such glorious
  pasts.Among the German people, I have done my utmost to eradicate the idea of
  everlasting enmity and to inculcate in its place a respect for the great
  achievements of the French nation and for its history, just as every German
  soldier has the greatest respect for the feats of the French Army. I have
  devoted no less effort to the achievement of an Anglo-German understanding,
  nay, more than that, of an Anglo-German friendship.At no time and in no place have I ever acted contrary to British interests.
  Unfortunately I have only too often been forced to guard against instances
  of British interference in German affairs, even in cases which did not concern
  Great Britain in the least. I actually considered it as one of my life aims
  to reconcile these two peoples, not only through mutual understanding but
  through inner sympathy.The German nation has gladly followed my lead in this respect. If my endeavors
  have been unsuccessful, it is only because of an animosity on the part of
  certain British statesmen and journalists, which has deeply affected me
  personally.They made no secret of the fact that - for reasons which are unfathomable
  to us - their sole aim was to seize the first opportunity in order to resume
  the fight with Germany. The fewer reasons of substantial nature these men
  have for their schemes, the more they attempt to motivate their actions with
  empty phrases and assertions.But I believe even today that there can only he real peace in Europe and
  throughout the world if Germany and England come to an understanding. Because
  of this conviction I have often shown the way to an understanding. If in
  the end there was not the desired result, it was really not my fault.Finally, I now also attempted to bring the relations between the Reich and
  Soviet Russia to a normal and, in the end, to a friendly basis. Thanks to
  a similar trend of thought on the part of Mr. Stalin these endeavors have
  now been realized. Now with that State lasting and friendly relations have
  been established, the effect of which will be a blessing to both nations.Thus the revision of the Versailles Treaty carried through by me did not
  cause any chaos in Europe, but on the contrary produced the prerequisite
  of clear, stable and bearable conditions.Only those who detest this order of things in Europe and wish for disorder
  can feel hostile to these actions. If, however, certain people think themselves
  obliged to reject with a hypocritical air the method by which a tolerable
  order of things was established in Central Europe, then my only reply to
  them is that in the end it is not so much the method but the useful result
  that counts.Before I came into power Central Europe, that is to say not only Germany
  but also the surrounding States, was sinking into the hopeless distress of
  unemployment and production had decreased, involving an automatic jump in
  commodity consumption. The standard of living went down. Distress and misery
  were the result.No criticizing foreign statesman can deny that not only in the old Reich
  but also in all the territory now merged with it, it has become possible
  to remove these indications of decay in the face of the most adverse conditions.It has thus been proved that only as an entity is this Central European space
  capable of existence and that whoever breaks up that entity commits a crime
  against millions of people.To have wiped out that crime does not amount to a breach of my word, but
  to me is honor itself; I am proud of it as my deed before history.Neither the German people nor myself has taken an oath on the Treaty of
  Versailles; I have merely taken an oath on the welfare of my people, who
  gave me my mandate and on the welfare of those whom destiny has placed within
  our living space, thus inseparably binding them to our own welfare.To guarantee the existence and thus the life of all of them is my sole concern.Any attempt to criticize, judge or reject my actions from the rostrum of
  international presumption has no foundation before history and personally
  leaves me stone-cold. I was called to my post by the confidence vested in
  me by the German people, whose attitude toward me is only strengthened by
  any such attempt at criticism or interference from abroad.Moreover, previous to each single revision I have put forward proposals.
  I had attempted, by means of negotiations, to achieve and secure what was
  absolutely indispensable. In a certain number of cases I was successful.
  In other cases, I am sorry to say, my readiness to negotiate and perhaps
  also the small extent of my demands and the modesty of my proposals were
  interpreted as a sign of weakness and therefore rejected. Nobody could have
  regretted this more than I did.There are, however, in the life of nations certain necessities which, if
  they are not brought about by peaceful methods, must be realized by force,
  however regrettable this appears, not only to the life of the individual
  citizen but also to the life of the community. It is undeniable that the
  greater interests common to all must never be impaired by the stubbornness
  or ill will of individuals and communities. To Poland, too, I made the most
  moderate proposals.They were not only rejected, but on the contrary brought forth the general
  mobilization of that State, for which reasons were advanced which proved
  conclusively exactly that it was the very modesty of my proposals which was
  considered a confirmation of my weakness, nay, even of my fear. Really, such
  an experience is apt to make anyone shrink from ever again making any reasonable
  and moderate proposals.Also at present I once more read in certain newspapers that every attempt
  to bring about a peaceful settlement of relations between Germany on the
  one hand and France and England on the other was doomed to failure, and that
  any proposal in that direction only proved that I, filled with apprehension,
  anticipated Germany's collapse and that I only made such a proposal out of
  cowardice, or from a bad conscience.When, irrespective of all this, I have expressed my ideas on this problem,
  I am prepared to appear in the eyes of these people as a coward or a finished
  man. I can afford to run that risk, because the judgment to be passed upon
  me by history will not, thank God, be written by these miserable scribblers
  but is established by my life's work, and because I do not care very much
  about any judgment that may be passed upon me by these people at the time.My prestige is sufficient for me to allow myself such an attitude, because
  the question of whether my following thoughts are actually dictated by fear
  or desperation will in any case be settled by the future course of events.
  Today I can only regret that those people, whose bloodthirstiness cannot
  have enough of war, unfortunately are not where the war is actually being
  fought, and never were at such places where people were shooting it out.I can very well understand that there are interested parties who profit more
  from war than from peace, and I also understand that for a certain variety
  of international journalist it is more interesting to report on war than
  on peaceful activities or cultural achievements, which they are incapable
  of either judging or understanding. And finally it is clear to me that there
  is a certain Jewish international capitalism and journalism that has no feeling
  at all in common with the people whose interests they pretend to represent,
  but who, like Herostrates of old, regard incendiarism as the greatest success
  of their lives. But there is still another reason why I feel obliged to voice
  my opinion.When reading certain international press publications, or listening to speeches
  of various capitalist glorifiers of war, I consider myself entitled to speak
  and reply in the name of those who are forced to serve as the living substance
  for the mental activities of these formulators of war aims, that living substance
  to which I myself belonged as an unknown soldier for more than four years
  during the Great War.It is, perhaps, a magnificent effect when a statesman or a journalist stands
  up and in enthusiastic words announces the necessity of removing the regime
  of another country in the name of democracy or something similar. Practical
  execution of these glorious slogans, however, has quite a different aspect.Newspaper articles are being written today which are sure of an enthusiastic
  reception by the distinguished public. Realization of demands therein contained,
  however, is apt to arouse much less enthusiasm; I shall not deal with the
  powers of judgment or the gifts of such people. Whatever they may write has
  no bearing on the real nature of such a struggle.These scribblers announced before the Polish campaign that German infantry
  perhaps was not bad, but that tank and mechanized units in general were inferior
  and would be, sure to break down in action.Now, after the defeat of Poland, the same people brazenly assert that the
  Polish armies have collapsed only because o German tank formations and other
  mechanized troops, but that, on the other hand, German infantry had deteriorated
  most remarkably and had got the worst of it in every clash with the Polish.'In this fact,' so one such writer actually says, 'one has the free right
  to see a favorable symptom for the course of the war in the West, and the
  French soldier will know how to take advantage of this.'I think so, too, provided he has read that article and can remember it later
  on. He will then probably box the ears of these military soothsayers. But
  unfortunately that will be impossible, since these people never will put
  their theories on inferiority of the German infantry to a personal test on
  the battlefields, but will merely describe these qualities from their editorial
  sanctums.Six weeks - let us say fourteen days - of concentrated shellfire, and these
  war propagandists would soon think differently. They always are talking of
  the necessities of world politics, but they have no knowledge of military
  realities.I do know them and for that reason I consider it my duty to speak here, even
  at risk of the warmonger again seeing in my speech evidence of my anxiety
  and symptoms of the degree of my despair.Why should this war in the West be fought? For restoration of Poland? Poland
  of the Versailles Treaty will never rise again. This is guaranteed by two
  of the largest States in the world. Final re-organization of this territory
  and the question of re-establishment of the Polish State are problems which
  will not be solved by a war in the West but exclusively by Russia on the
  one hand and Germany on the other.Furthermore, the elimination of the influence of these two Powers within
  the territories concerned would not produce a new State but utter chaos.The problems awaiting solution there will never be solved either at the
  conference table or in editorial offices, but by the work of decades. It
  is not enough that a few statesmen who are not really concerned with the
  fate of the people affected get together and pass resolutions. It is necessary
  that someone who has himself a share in the life of these territories takes
  over the task of restoring really enduring conditions there. The ability
  of the Western democracies to restore such ordered conditions has at least
  in recent times not been proved.The example of Palestine shows it would be better to concentrate on the tasks
  at hand and solve these in a reasonable manner instead of meddling with problems
  which lie within the vital spheres of interest of other nations and could
  certainly be better solved by them. At any rate, Germany has in her Protectorate
  of Bohemia and Moravia not only established peace and order but, above all,
  has laid the foundation for a new economic prosperity and increasing
  understanding between the two nations. England still has much to accomplish
  before she can point to similar results in her Protectorate in Palestine.One also realizes that it would be senseless to annihilate millions of men
  and to destroy property worth millions in order to reconstruct a State which
  at its very birth was termed an abortion by all those not of Polish extraction.What other reason exists? Has Germany made any demands of England which might
  threaten the British Empire or endanger its existence? On the contrary, Germany
  has made no such demands on either France or England.But if this war is really to be waged only in order to give Germany a new
  regime, that is to say, in order to destroy the present Reich once more and
  thus to create a new Treaty of Versailles, then millions of human lives will
  be sacrificed in vain, for neither will the German Reich go to pieces nor
  will a second Treaty of Versailles be made. And even should this come to
  pass after three, four, or even eight years of war then this second Versailles
  would once more become the source of fresh conflict in the future.In any event, a settlement of the world's problems carried out without
  consideration of the vital interests of its most powerful nations could not
  possibly, after the lapse of from five to ten years, end in any other way
  than that attempt made twenty years ago which is now ended. No, this war
  in the West cannot settle any problems except perhaps the ruined finances
  of certain armament manufacturers, newspaper owners, or other international
  war profiteers.Two problems are ripe for discussion today.First, the settlement of the problems arising from the disintegration of
  Poland and, second, the problem of eliminating those international difficulties
  which endanger the political and economic existence of the nations.What then are the aims of the Reich Government as regards the adjustment
  of conditions within the territory to the west of the German-Soviet line
  of demarcation which has been recognized as Germany's sphere of influence?First, the creation of a Reich frontier which, as has already been emphasized,
  shall be in accordance with existing historical, ethnographical and economic
  conditions.Second, the disposition of the entire living space according to the various
  nationalities; that is to say, the solution of the problems affecting the
  minorities which concern not only this area but nearly all the States in
  the Southwest of Europe.Third, in this connection: An attempt to reach a solution and settlement
  of the Jewish problem.Fourth, reconstruction of transport facilities and economic life in the interest
  of all those living in this area.Fifth, a guarantee for the security of this entire territory and sixth, formation
  of a Polish State so constituted and governed as to prevent its becoming
  once again either a hotbed of anti-German activity or a center of intrigue
  against Germany and Russia.In addition to this, an attempt must immediately be made to wipe out or at
  least to mitigate the ill effects of war; that is to say, the adoption of
  practical measures for alleviation of the terrible distress prevailing there.These problems can, as I have already emphasized, perhaps be discussed but
  never solved at the conference table.If Europe is really sincere in her desire for peace, then the States in Europe
  ought to be grateful that Russia and Germany are prepared to transform this
  hotbed into a zone of peaceful development and that these two countries will
  assume the responsibility and bear the burdens inevitably involved.For the Reich this project, since it cannot be undertaken in an imperialistic
  spirit, is a task which will take fifty to a hundred years to perform.Justification for this activity on Germany's part lies in the political
  organizing of this territory as well as in its economic development. In the
  long run, of course, all Europe will benefit from it. Second, and in my opinion
  by far the most important task, is the creation of not only a belief in,
  but also a sense of, European security.For this it is necessary first that aims in the foreign policy of European
  States should be made perfectly clear.As far as Germany is concerned the Reich Government is ready to give a thorough
  and exhaustive exposition of the aims of its foreign policy.In so doing, they begin by stating that the Treaty of Versailles is now regarded
  by them as obsolete; in other words, that the government of the German Reich,
  and with them the whole German people, no longer see cause or reason for
  any further revision of the Treaty, apart from the demand for adequate colonial
  possessions justly due to the Reich, namely, in the first instance, for the
  return of German colonies.This demand for colonies is based not only on Germany's historical claim
  to German colonies but above all on her elementary right to a share of the
  world's resources of raw materials. This demand does not take the form of
  an ultimatum, nor is it a demand backed by force, but a demand based on political
  justice and sane economic principles.Secondly, the demand for a real revival of international economic life, coupled
  with an extension of trade and commerce, presupposes a reorganization of
  the international economic system; in other words, of production in the
  individual States. In order to facilitate the exchange of goods thus produced,
  however, markets must be organized and a final currency regulation arrived
  at so that the obstacles in the way of unrestricted trade can be gradually
  removed.Thirdly, the most important condition, however, for a real revival of economic
  life in and outside of Europe is the establishment of an unconditionally
  guaranteed peace and of a sense of security on the part of the individual
  nations.This security will not only be rendered possible by the final sanctioning
  of the European status, but above all by the reduction of armaments to a
  reasonable and economically tolerable level. An essential part of this necessary
  sense of security, however, is a clear definition of the legitimate use of
  an application of certain modern armaments which can, at any given moment,
  have such a devastating effect on the pulsating life of every nation and
  hence create a permanent sense of insecurity.In my previous speeches in the Reichstag I made proposals with this end in
  view. At that time they were rejected -maybe for the simple reason that they
  were made by me. I believe, however, that a sense of national security will
  not return to Europe until clear and binding international agreements have
  provided a comprehensive definition of the legitimate and illegitimate use
  of armaments.A Geneva convention once succeeded in prohibiting, in civilized countries
  at least, the killing of wounded, ill treatment of prisoners, war against
  noncombatants, etc., and just as it was possible gradually to achieve universal
  observance of this statute, a way must surely be found to regulate aerial
  warfare, use of poison gas and submarines, etc., and also so to define contraband
  that war will lose its terrible character of conflict waged against women
  and children and against noncombatants in general. A growing horror of certain
  methods of warfare will of its own accord lead to their abolition and thus
  they will become obsolete.In the war with Poland I endeavored to restrict aerial warfare to objectives
  of so-called military importance, or only to employ it to combat active
  resistance at a given point. But it must surely be possible to emulate the
  Red Cross and to draw up some universally valid international regulations.
  It is only when this is achieved that peace can reign, particularly in our
  densely populated continent - a peace which, uncontaminated by suspicion
  and fear, will provide the only possible condition for real economic prosperity.I do not believe that there is any responsible statesman in Europe who does
  not in his heart desire prosperity for his people. But such a desire can
  only be realized if all the nations inhabiting this continent decide to go
  to work together. To assist in assuring this co-operation must be the aim
  of every man who is sincerely struggling for the future of his own people.To achieve this great end, the leading nations of this continent will one
  day have to come together in order to draw up, accept, and guarantee a statute
  on a comprehensive basis which will insure for them all a sense of security,
  of calm - in short, of peace.Such a conference could not possibly be held without the most thorough
  preparation; this is, without exact elucidation of every point at issue.It is equally impossible that such a conference, which is to determine the
  fate of this continent for many years to come, could carry on its deliberations
  while cannon are thundering or mobilized armies are bringing pressure to
  bear upon it.If, however, these problems must be solved sooner or later, then it would
  be more sensible to tackle the solution before millions of men are first
  uselessly sent to death and milliards of riches destroyed.Continuation of the present state of affairs in the West is unthinkable.
  Each day will soon demand increasing sacrifices.Perhaps the day will come when France will begin to bombard and demolish
  Saarbruccken. German artillery will in turn lay Mulhouse in ruins. France
  will retaliate by bombarding Karlsruhe and Germany in her turn will shell
  Strasbourg.Then the French artillery will fire at Freiburg, and the German at Kolmar
  or Schlettstadt. Long-range guns will then be set up and from both sides
  will strike deeper and deeper and whatever cannot be reached by the long-distance
  guns will be destroyed from the air.And that will be very interesting for certain international journalists and
  very profitable for the airplane, arms, and munitions manufacturers, but
  appalling for the victims.And this battle of destruction will not be confined to the land. No, it will
  reach far out over the sea.Today there are no longer any islands. And the national wealth of Europe
  will be scattered in the form of shells and the vigor of every nation will
  be sapped on the battlefields.One day, however, there will again be a frontier between Germany and France,
  but instead of flourishing towns there will be ruins and endless graveyards.Mr. Churchill and his companions may interpret these opinions of mine as
  weakness or cowardice if they like. I need not occupy myself with what they
  think; I make these statements simply because it goes without saying that
  I wish to spare my own people this suffering.If, however, the opinions of Messrs. Churchill and followers should prevail,
  this statement will have been my last.Then we shall fight. Neither force of arms nor lapse of time will conquer
  Germany. There never will be another November 1918 in German history. It
  is infantile to hope for the disintegration of our people.Mr. Churchill may be convinced that Great Britain will win. I do not doubt
  for a single moment that Germany will be victorious.Destiny will decide who is right.One thing only is certain. In the course of world history, there have never
  been two victors, but very often only losers. This seems to me to have been
  the case in the last war.May those peoples and their leaders who are of the same mind now make their
  reply. And let those who consider war to be the better solution reject my
  outstretched hand.As Fuehrer of the German people and Chancellor of the Reich, I can thank
  God at this moment that he has so wonderfully blessed us in our hard struggle
  for what is our right, and beg Him that we and all other nations may find
  the right way, so that not only the German people but all Europe may once
  more be granted the blessing of peace.Saarbruecken -- Speech of October 9, 1938SAARBRUECKENSPEECH OF OCTOBER 9, 1938German Folk!If in the midst of these great days and their occurrences I have come into
  your district, then it was done in the conviction that nobody can evince
  greater appreciation of these last weeks and days than yourself.You may, men and women of Saarland, you have experienced for yourselves what
  it means to be separated from the Reich and you yourselves have gone through
  the joy of being reunited. You, too, suffered all this woe for two decades,
  and you, too, were supremely happy when the hour of reunion struck and you
  could return to the common Reich. Exactly that same thing was experienced
  and participated in by millions of Germans. The same joy seized them that
  once stirred you. At the beginning of this year, the twentieth after our
  collapse, I made a decision to lead back into the Reich 10,000,000 Germans
  who still stood outside.It was perfectly clear to me that this return could be compelled only by
  our own strength. The rest of the world, for the largest part, had no
  understanding. It neither saw nor wanted to see that here, 10,000,000 humans,
  in violation of the so-called right of self-determination of peoples, had
  been separated from the German people and the Reich and had been maltreated.
  But it has not understood that these human beings had but one great yearning,
  namely, to return to the Reich. These international world citizens have
  compassion indeed, for every scoundrel who is called to account in Germany,
  but they are deaf to the sufferings of millions. That world is still filled
  with the spirit of Versailles. It did not free itself from it. No, Germany
  has liberated herself from it.Even today it still is a mixture of terrible inconsiderateness and appalling
  ignorance for these countries to overlook justice and give lasting effect
  to injustice. And so these world democracies remained deaf for twenty years
  to all the sufferings and demands of 10,000,000 Germans. Accordingly, a hard
  decision had to be made. Among us, too, there were weak characters who did
  not understand this. It is self-evident, however, that statesmen conscious
  of their responsibility made it a point of honor to take responsibility.The following were the preconditions for bringing about and carrying through
  solutions:First, internal unity of the nation. I am convinced I am Leader of a manly
  people. I know what probably many in the rest of the world and even isolated
  ones in Germany do not seem as yet to know - namely, that the people of the
  year 1938 are not the people of 1918. Only those who were blind concerning
  National Socialism could overlook the tremendous work of education that the
  good philosophy of life has accomplished. There has been created today a
  community of spirit throughout our people of power and strength such as Germany
  never before has known. This was the first precondition for the undertaking,
  and for the success of this task.Second was national rearmament, which I sponsored fanatically for six years.
  I am of the opinion that it is cheaper to prepare one's self before events
  than to lie prostrate unprepared for events and then pay the foreign country.The third thing was rendering secure the Reich, and here you yourselves are
  witnesses to the tremendous work that is being accomplished in your very
  neighborhood. I need tell you no details about it. I will give expression,
  however, to but one conviction: NO POWER IN THE WORLD WILL BE ABLE TO PUSH
  THROUGH THIS WALL.Fourth, we have gained foreign friends. That axis that people in other countries
  so often think they can ridicule has, during the last two and a half years,
  not only proved durable but has proved that even in the worst hours it con-
  tinues to function. Nevertheless, we are especially happy that this task
  of the year 1938 of again joining 10,000,000 Germans and about 110,000 square
  kilometers [42,470 square miles] to the Reich could be accomplished in peace.We are all so happy no blood was shed over this despite the hopes of so many
  international agitators and profiteers. If I mention the help of the rest
  of the world in bringing about this peaceful solution, I must again and again
  place at the head of it our only real friend whom we possess today - Benito
  Mussolini.I know, and I know that you know what we owe this man. I should like also
  to mention two other statesmen who tried hard to find a way to peace and
  who, together with the great Italian and us have concluded an agreement that
  secured justice for 10,000,000 Germans and peace for the world. I am happy
  these millions of Germans are free, that they belong to us and that peace
  has been secured.Nevertheless, the experiences, especially of the last eight months, must
  strengthen our resolve to be careful and never to leave anything undone that
  must be done for the protection of the Reich. Opposite us are statesmen who
  - that, we must believe of them - also want peace. HOWEVER, THEY GOVERN IN
  COUNTRIES WHOSE INTERNAL CONSTRUCTION MAKES IT POSSIBLE FOR THEM AT ANY TIME
  TO BE SUPPLANTED BY OTHERS WHO DO NOT AIM AT PEACE. THESE OTHERS ARE THERE.
  IN ENGLAND, IT MERELY IS NECESSARY THAT INSTEAD OF CHAMBERLAIN, A DUFF COOPER
  OR AN EDEN OR A CHURCHILL COME INTO POWER. WE KNOW THAT THE AIM OF THESE
  MEN WOULD BE TO START WAR. They do not attempt to hide it. That obligates
  us to be on the watch to think of the protection of the Reich.We know further that now, as before, there is lurking threateningly that
  Jewish-international world enemy who has found a living expression in bolshevism.
  We also know the power of the international press that lives solely on lies
  and calumniation. In view of this peculiarity of the world about us and of
  these forces we must be careful about the future. We must at all times have
  a will for peace but be ready for defense.I have, therefore, decided to continue construction of our fortifications
  in the west with increased energy as already indicated in my Nuremberg speech.
  Also, I shall include large districts that hitherto lay before our fortifications
  namely the Aachen region and Saarbruecken region, in this belt of fortifications.
  That will be done for the protection of the Reich.As for the rest, I am happy now to be able within the next few days to rescind
  those measures that we have projected or been compelled to introduce during
  critical months and weeks. I am happy hundreds of thousands of men can go
  home and reservists can be discharged. I am happy to be able to thank them
  for doing their duty. I am particularly happy to be able to thank the German
  people for having conducted itself in so wonderfully manly a manner. Especially
  do I thank a hundred thousand German workers, engineers and others of whom
  10,000 are standing in your midst - men who helped build fortifications.
  You have helped, my comrades, to secure peace for Germany, and so, as a strong
  State, we are ready at all times to embark upon a policy of understanding
  with the world about us. We can do that. We want nothing from others. We
  have no wishes or demands. We want peace.There is only one thing - THIS REFERS TO OUR RELATIONS TO ENGLAND: IT WOULD
  BE GOOD IF IN ENGLAND CERTAIN MANNERISMS HELD OVER FROM THE VERSAILLES PERIOD
  WERE DISCARDED. WE JUST CANNOT STAND FOR A GOVERNESS-LIKE GUARDIANSHIP OF
  GERMANY.Inquiries by British statesmen or Parliamentarians concerning the fate of
  the Reich's subjects inside Germany are out of order. We do not bother about
  similar things in England. The rest of the world would sometimes have had
  reason enough to bother about international happenings - happenings in Palestine.
  We leave this to those who feel themselves pre-ordained by God to solve these
  problems. And we observe with amazement how they do solve them. We must,
  however, give these gentlemen advice to attend even more to the solution
  of their own problems and to leave us in peace.It also is part of the task of securing world peace that responsible statesmen
  and politicians look after their own affairs and refrain from constantly
  meddling talk with the problems of other countries and peoples. By such mutual
  considerateness, preconditions are really created for durable peace, of which
  no one is more earnestly desirous than the German people.We have great tasks facing us, great cultural tasks. Economic problems must
  be solved. No people can make better use of peace than we. However, no people
  knows better than we what it means to be weak and be at the mercy of others
  for better or for worse....Weimar -- Speech of November 6, 1938WEIMARSPEECH OF NOVEMBER 6, 1938WHAT seems to us almost a miracle as we look back upon it is nothing else
  than the reward for infinite and unwearying labor.... And now for that labor
  we have received from Providence our reward, just as the Germany of 1918
  received its reward. At that time Germany shared in those blessings which
  we think of under the collective idea Democracy. But Germany has learned
  that democracy in practice is a different thing from democracy in theory.If today at times in foreign countries Parliamentarians or politicians venture
  to maintain that Germany has not kept her treaties, then we can give as our
  answer to these men: the greatest breach of a treaty that ever was practiced
  on the German people. Every promise which had been made to Germany in the
  Fourteen Points - those promises on the faith of which Germany had laid down
  her arms - was afterwards broken. In 1932 Germany was faced with final collapse.
  The German Reich and people both seemed lost. And then came the German
  resurrection. It began with a change of faith. While all the German parties
  before us believed in forces and ideals which lay outside of the German Reich
  and outside of our people, we National Socialists have resolutely championed
  belief in our own people, starting from that watchword of eternal validity:
  God helps only those who are prepared and determined to help themselves.
  In the place of all those international factors - Democracy, the Conscience
  of Peoples, the Conscience of the World, the League of Nations, and the like
  - we have set a single factor - our own people. . . .We were all convinced that a true community of the people is not produced
  overnight - it is not attained through theories or programs - but that through
  many decades, yes, and perhaps always and for all time the individual must
  be trained for this community. This work of education we have carried through
  ever since the Party was founded and especially since we came into power.
  But nothing is perfect in this world and no success can be felt to be finally
  satisfying. And so, even today, we have no wish to maintain that our achievement
  is already the realization of our ideal. We have an ideal which floats before
  our minds and in accordance with that ideal we educate Germans, generation
  after generation. So National Socialism will continually be transformed from
  a profession of political faith to a real education of the people....The umbrella-carrying types of our former bourgeois world of parties are
  extinguished and they will never return...From the very first day I have proclaimed as a fundamental principle: 'the
  German is either the first soldier in the world or he is no soldier at all.'
  No soldiers at all we cannot be, and we do not wish to be. Therefore we shall
  be only the first. As one who is a lover of peace I have endeavored to create
  for the German people such an army and such munitions as are calculated to
  convince others, too, to seek peace.There are, it is true, people who abuse the hedgehog because it has spines.
  But they have only got to leave the animal in peace. No hedgehog has ever
  attacked anyone unless he was first threatened. That should be our position,
  too. Folk must not come too near us. We want nothing else than to be left
  in peace; we want the possibility of going on with our work, we claim for
  our people the right to live, the same right which others claim for themselves.
  And that the democratic States above all others should grasp and understand,
  for they never stop talking about equality of rights. If they keep talking
  about the rights of small peoples, how can they be outraged if in its turn
  a great people claims the same right? Our National Socialist Army serves
  to secure and guarantee this claim of right.It is with this in view that in foreign policy also I have initiated a change
  in our attitude and have drawn closer to those who like us were compelled
  to stand up for their rights.And when today I examine the results of this action of ours, then I am able
  to say: Judge all of you for yourselves: Have we not gained enormously through
  acting on these principles?But precisely for this reason we do not wish that we should ever forget what
  has made these successes of ours possible. When certain foreign newspapers
  write: 'But all that you could have gained by the way of negotiation,' we
  know very well that Germany before our day did nothing but negotiate
  continuously. For fifteen years they only negotiated and they lost everything
  for their pains. I, too, am ready to negotiate but I leave no one in any
  doubt that neither by way of negotiation nor by any other way will I allow
  the rights of Germany to be cut down. Never forget, German people, to what
  it is you owe your successes - to what Movement, to what ideas, and to what
  principles! And in the second place: always be cautious, be ever on your
  guard!It is very fine to talk of international peace and international disarmament,
  but I am mistrustful of a disarmament in weapons of war so long as there
  has been no disarmament of the spirit.There has been formed in the world the curious custom of dividing peoples
  into so-called 'authoritarian' States, that is disciplined States, and democratic
  States. In the authoritarian, that is, the disciplined States, it goes without
  saying that one does not abuse foreign peoples, does not lie about them,
  does not incite to war. But the democratic States are precisely 'democratic,'
  that is, that all this can happen there In the authoritarian States a war
  - agitation is of course impossible, for their Governments are under an
  obligation to see to it that there is no such thing. In the democracies,
  on the other hand, the Governments have only one duty: to maintain democracy,
  and that means the liberty, if necessary, to incite to war....Mr. Churchill had stated his view publicly, namely that the present regime
  in Germany must be overthrown with the aid of forces within Germany which
  would gladly co-operate. If Mr. Churchill would but spend less of his time
  in emigre circles, that is with traitors to their country maintained and
  paid abroad, and more of his time with Germans, then he would realize the
  utter madness and stupidity of his idle chatter. I can only assure this
  gentleman, who would appear to be living in the moon, of one thing: there
  is no such force in Germany which could turn against the present regime.I will not refuse to grant to this gentleman that, naturally we have no right
  to demand that the other peoples should alter their constitutions. But, as
  leader of the Germans, I have the duty to consider this constitution of theirs
  and the possibilities which result from it. When a few days ago in the House
  of Commons the Deputy Leader of the Opposition declared that he made no secret
  of the fact that he would welcome the destruction of Germany and Italy, then,
  of course, I cannot prevent it if perhaps this man on the basis of the democratic
  rules of the game should in fact with his party in one or two years become
  the Government. But of one thing I can assure him: I can prevent him from
  destroying Germany. And just as I am convinced that the German people will
  take care that the plans of these gentlemen so far as Germany is concerned
  will never succeed, so in precisely the same way Fascist Italy will, I know,
  take care for itself!I believe that for us all these international hopes can only teach us to
  stand firm together and to cling to our friends. The more that we in Germany
  form a single community, the less favorable will be the prospects of these
  inciters to war, and the closer we unite ourselves in particular with the
  State which is in a position similar to ours, with Italy, the less desire
  they will have to pick a quarrel with us! . . .Germany has become greater by the most natural way, by a way which could
  not be more morally unassailable.... When the rest of the world speaks of
  disarmament, then we too are ready for disarmament, but under one condition:
  the war-agitation must first be disarmed!So long as the others only talk of disarmament, while they infamously continue
  to incite to war, we must presume that they do but wish to steal from us
  our arms, in order once more to prepare for us the fate of 1918-19. And in
  that case, my only answer to Mr. Churchill and his like must be: That happens
  once only and it will not be repeated! . . .Munich, Gathering of the SA -- Speech Of November 9, 1921MUNICH, GATHERING OF THE SASPEECH OF NOVEMBER 9, 1921On November 9, 1921--just five days after the Battle of the Hall
(Saalschlacht) where fewer than fifty SA Men had beaten back more than 400
communists and Jews who had tried to disrupt Hitler's speech in the Festival
Hall of the Hofbrauhaus--Adolf Hitler addressed a gathering of SA Men.  The
following is what he told them:For us there are only two possiblities: either we remain German or we come
  under the thumb of the Jews.  This latter must not occur; even if we are
  small, we are a force.  A well-organized group can conquer a strong enemy.
  If you stick close together and keep bringing in new people, we will be
  victorious over the Jews.Essen, Party Convention -- Speech of November 23, 1926ESSEN, PARTY CONVENTIONSPEECH OF NOVEMBER 23, 1926. . . I WAS always particularly anxious to secure that Parteitag should on
  principle never be used for the settlement of personal disputes. Such disputes
  must certainly be settled in one way or another, but just as certainly the
  Parteitag which once in the year should unite the whole Movement, is not
  the fitting day for such a settlement. Neither is it the place at which to
  seek to clarify unripe and uncertain ideas. Neither the length of time available
  at such a gathering nor its nature admits of giving to it the character of
  a Council. And it must never be forgotten that in all such cases or those
  similar to them great decisions have not been made at such Councils: on the
  contrary, for the most part, world-history pursues its course without paying
  any attention to them. World-history, like all events of historical significance,
  is the result of the activity of single individuals - it is not the fruit
  of majority decisions....Berlin, Rheinmetall-Borsig Works -- Speech of December 10, 1940BERLIN, RHEINMETALL-BORSIG WORKSSPEECH OF DECEMBER 10, 1940FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN, workers of Germany:Nowadays I do not speak very often. In the first place I have little time
  for speaking, and in the second place I believe that this is a time for action
  rather than speech. We are involved in a conflict in which more than the
  victory of only one country or the other is at stake; it is rather a war
  of two opposing worlds. I shall try to give you, as far as possible in the
  time at my disposal, an insight into the essential reasons underlying this
  conflict. I shall, however, confine myself to Western Europe only. The peoples
  who are primarily affected - 85 million Germans, 46 million Britishers, 45
  million Italians, and about 37 million Frenchmen -are the cores of the States
  who were or still are opposed in war. If I make a comparison between the
  living conditions of these peoples the following facts become evident:Forty-six million Britishers dominate and govern approximately 16 million
  square miles of the surface of the earth. Thirty-seven million Frenchmen
  dominate and govern a combined area of approximately 4 million square miles.
  Forty-five million Italians possess, taking into consideration only those
  territories in any way capable of being utilized, an area of scarcely 190,000
  square miles. Eighty-five million Germans possess as their living space scarcely
  232,000 square miles. That is to say: 85 million Germans own only 232,000
  square miles on which they must live their lives and 46 million Britishers
  possess 16 million square miles.Now, my fellow-countrymen, this world has not been so divided up by providence
  or Almighty God. This allocation has been made by man himself. The land was
  parcelled out for the most part during the last 300 years, that is, during
  the period in which, unfortunately, the German people were helpless and torn
  by internal dissension. Split up into hundreds of small states in consequence
  of the Treaty of Muenster at the end of the Thirty Years' War, our people
  frittered away their entire strength in internal strife.... While during
  this period the Germans, notwithstanding their particular ability among the
  people of Western Europe, dissipated their powers in vain internal struggles,
  the division of the world proceeded beyond their borders. It was not by treaties
  or by binding agreements, but exclusively by the use of force that Britain
  forged her gigantic Empire.The second people that failed to receive their fair share in this distribution,
  namely the Italians, experienced and suffered a similar fate. Torn by internal
  conflicts, devoid of unity, split up into numerous small states, this people
  also dissipated all their energy in internal strife. Nor was Italy able to
  obtain even the natural position in the Mediterranean which was her due.Thus in comparison with others, these two powerful peoples have received
  much less than their fair share. The objection might be raised: Is this really
  of decisive importance?My fellow-countrymen, man does not exist on theories and phrases, on declarations
  or on systems of political philosophy; he lives on what he can gain from
  the soil by his own labor in the form of food and raw materials. This is
  what he can eat, this is what he can use for manufacture and production.
  If a man's own living conditions offer him too little, his life will be wretched.
  We see that within the countries themselves, fruitful areas afford better
  living conditions than poor barren lands. In the one case there are flourishing
  villages; in the other poverty-stricken communities. A man may live in a
  stony desert or in a fruitful land of plenty. This handicap can never be
  fully overcome by theories, nor even by the will to work.We see that the primary cause for the existing tensions lies in the unfair
  distribution of the riches of the earth. And it is only natural that evolution
  follows the same rule in the larger framework as it does in the case of
  individuals. Just as the tension existing between rich and poor within a
  country must be compensated for either by reason or often if reason fails,
  by force, so in the life of a nation one cannot claim everything and leave
  nothing to others....The great task which I set myself in internal affairs was to bring reason
  to bear on the problems, to eliminate dangerous tensions by invoking the
  common sense of all, to bridge the gulf between excessive riches and excessive
  poverty. I recognized, of course, that such processes cannot be consummated
  overnight. It is always preferable to bring together widely separated classes
  gradually and by the exercise of reason, rather than to resort to a solution
  based on force. . .Therefore, the right to live is at the same time a just claim to the soil
  which alone is the source of life. When unreasonableness threatened to choke
  their development, nations fought for this sacred claim. No other course
  was open to them and they realized that even bloodshed and sacrifice are
  better than the gradual extinction of a nation. Thus, at the beginning of
  our National Socialist Revolution in 1933, we set forth two demands. The
  first of these was the unification of our people, for without this unification
  it would not have been possible to mobilize the forces required to formulate
  and, particularly, to secure Germany's essential claims. . . .For us, therefore, national unity was one of the essential conditions if
  we were to co-ordinate the powers inherent in the German nation properly,
  to make the German people conscious of their own greatness, realize their
  strength, recognize and present their vital claims, and seek national unity
  by an appeal to reason.I know that I have not been successful everywhere. For nearly fifteen years
  of my struggle I was the target of two opposing sides. One side reproached
  me: 'You want to drag us who belong to the intelligentsia and to the upper
  classes down to the level of the others. That is impossible. We are educated
  people. In addition to that, we are wealthy and cultured. We cannot accept
  this.'These people were incapable of listening to reason; even today there are
  some who cannot be converted. However, on the whole the number of those who
  realize that the lack of unity in our national structure would sooner or
  later lead to the destruction of all classes has become greater and greater.I also met with opposition from the other side. They said: 'We have our class
  consciousness.' However, I was obliged to take the stand that in the existing
  situation we could not afford to make experiments. It certainly would have
  been simple to eliminate the intelligentsia. Such a process could be carried
  out at once. But we would have to wait fifty or perhaps a hundred years for
  the gap to refill - and such a period would mean the destruction of the nation.
  For how can our people, its 360 per square mile, exist at all if they do
  not employ every ounce of brain power and physical strength to wrest from
  their soil what they need? This distinguishes us from the others. In Canada,
  for example, there are 2.6 persons per square mile; in other countries perhaps
  16, 18, 20 or 26 persons. Well, my fellow-countrymen, no matter how stupidly
  one managed one's affairs in such a country, a decent living would still
  be possible.Here in Germany, however, there are 360 persons per square mile. The others
  cannot manage with 26 persons per square mile, but we must manage with 360.
  This is the task we face. That is why I expressed this view in 1933: 'We
  must solve these problems and, therefore, we shall solve them.' Of course
  that was not easy; everything could not be done immediately. Human beings
  are the product of their education, and, unfortunately, this begins practically
  at birth. Infants are clothed in different ways. After this has been going
  on for centuries, someone suddenly comes along and says: - 'I want to unwrap
  the child and remove all its clothing so that I may discover its true nature'
  - which is, of course, the same in every case. You have only created the
  difference by the external wrappings; underneath these they are all alike.However, it is not so easy to do this. Everyone resists being unwrapped.
  Everyone wishes to retain the habits he has acquired through his upbringing.
  But we will carry out our task just the same. We have enormous patience.
  I know that what has been done for three, four, or five centuries cannot
  be undone in two, three, or five years. The decisive point is to make a start....It has been a tremendous task. The establishment of a German community was
  the first item on the program in 1933. The second item was the elimination
  of foreign oppression as expressed in the Treaty of Versailles, which also
  prevented our attaining national unity, forbade large sections of our people
  to unite, and robbed us of our possessions in the world, our German colonies.The second item on the program was, therefore, the struggle against Versailles.
  No one can say that I express this opinion for the first time today. I expressed
  it, my fellowcountrymen, in the days following the Great War when, still
  a soldier, I made my first appearance in the political arena. My first address
  was a speech against the collapse, against the Treaty of Versailles, and
  for the re-establishment of a powerful German Reich. That was the beginning
  of my work. What I have brought about since then does not represent a new
  aim but the oldest aim. It is the primary reason for the conflict in which
  we find ourselves today. The rest of the world did not want our inner unity,
  because they knew that, once it was achieved, the vital claim of our masses
  could be realized. They wanted to maintain the Dictate of Versailles in which
  they saw a second peace of Westphalia. However, there is still another reason.
  I have stated that the world was unequally divided. American observers and
  Englishmen have found a wonderful expression for this fact: They say there
  are two kinds of peoples - the 'haves' and the 'have-nots.' We, the British,
  are the 'haves.' It is a fact that we possess sixteen million square miles.
  And we Americans are also 'haves,' and so are we Frenchmen. The others -
  they are simply the 'have-nots.' He who has nothing receives nothing. He
  shall remain what he is. He who has is not willing to share it.All my life I have been a 'have-not.' At home I was a 'have-not.' I regard
  myself as belonging to them and have always fought exclusively for them.
  I defended them and, therefore, I stand before the world as their representative.
  I shall never recognize the claim of the others to that which they have taken
  by force. Under no circumstances can I acknowledge this claim with regard
  to that which has been taken from us. It is interesting to examine the life
  of these rich people. In this Anglo-French world there exists, as it were,
  democracy, which means the rule of the people by the people. Now the people
  must possess some means of giving expression to their thoughts or their wishes.
  Examining this problem more closely, we see that the people themselves have
  originally no convictions of their own. Their convictions are formed, of
  course, just as everywhere else. The decisive question is who enlightens
  the people, who educates them? In those countries, it is actually capital
  that rules; that is, nothing more than a clique of a few hundred men who
  possess untold wealth and, as a consequence of the peculiar structure of
  their national life, are more or less independent and free. They say: 'Here
  we have liberty.' By this they mean, above all, an uncontrolled economy,
  and by an uncontrolled economy, the freedom not only to acquire capital but
  to make absolutely free use of it. That means freedom from national control
  or control by the people both in the acquisition of capital and in its
  employment. This is really what they mean when they speak of liberty. These
  capitalists create their own press and then speak of the 'freedom of the
  press.'In reality, every one of the newspapers has a master, and in every case this
  master is the capitalist, the owner. This master, not the editor, is the
  one who directs the policy of the paper. If the editor tries to write other
  than what suits the master, he is ousted the next day. This press, which
  is the absolutely submissive and characterless slave of the owners, molds
  public opinion. Public opinion thus mobilized by them is, in its turn, split
  up into political parties. The difference between these parties is as small
  as it formerly was in Germany. You know them, of course - the old parties.
  They were always one and the same. In Britain matters are usually so arranged
  that families are divided up, one member being a conservative, another a
  liberal, and a third belonging to the labor party. Actually, all three sit
  together as members of the family, decide upon their common attitude and
  determine it. A further point is that the 'elected people' actually form
  a community which operates and controls all these organizations. For this
  reason, the opposition in England is really always the same, for on all essential
  matters in which the opposition has to make itself felt, the parties are
  always in agreement. They have one and the same conviction and through the
  medium of the press mold public opinion along corresponding lines. One might
  well believe that in these countries of liberty and riches, the people must
  possess an unlimited degree of prosperity. But no! On the contrary, it is
  precisely in these countries that the distress of the masses is greater than
  anywhere else. Such is the case in 'rich Britain.'She controls sixteen million square miles. In India, for example, a hundred
  million colonial workers with a wretched standard of living must labor for
  her. One might think, perhaps, that at least in England itself every person
  must have his share of these riches. By no means! In that country class
  distinction is the crassest imaginable. There is poverty - incredible poverty
  - on the one side, and equally incredible wealth on the other. They have
  not solved a single problem. The workmen of that country which possesses
  more than one-sixth of the globe and of the world's natural resources dwell
  in misery, and the masses of the people are poorly clad.. In a country which
  ought to have more than enough bread and every sort of fruit, we find millions
  of the lower classes who have not even enough to fill their stomachs, and
  go about hungry. A nation which could provide work for the whole world must
  acknowledge the fact that it cannot even abolish unemployment at home. For
  decades this rich Britain has had two and a half million unemployed; rich
  America, ten to thirteen millions, year after year; France, six, seven, and
  eight hundred thousand. Well, my fellow-countrymen - what then are we to
  say about ourselves?It is self-evident that where this democracy rules, the people as such are
  not taken into consideration at all. The only thing that matters is the existence
  of a few hundred gigantic capitalists who own all the factories and their
  stock and, through them, control the people. The masses of the people do
  not interest them in the least. They are interested in them just as were
  our bourgeois parties in former times - only when elections are being held,
  when they need votes. Otherwise, the life of the masses is a matter of complete
  indifference to them.To this must be added the difference in education. Is it not ludicrous to
  hear a member of the British Labor Party - who, of course, as a member of
  the Opposition is officially paid by the government - say: 'When the war
  is over, we will do something in social respects'?It is the members of Parliament who are the directors of the business concerns
  - just as used to be the case with us. But we have abolished all that. A
  member of the Reichstag cannot belong to a Board of Directors, except as
  a purely honorary member. He is prohibited from accepting any emolument,
  financial or otherwise. This is not the case in other countries.They reply: 'That is why our form of government is sacred to us.' I can well
  believe it, for that form of government certainly pays very well.. But whether
  it is sacred to the mass of the people as well is another matter.The people as a whole definitely suffer. I do not consider it possible in
  the long run for one man to work and toil for a whole year in return for
  ridiculous wages, while another jumps into an express train once a year and
  pockets enormous sums. Such conditions are a disgrace. On the other hand,
  we National Socialists equally oppose the theory that all men are equals.
  Today, when a man of genius makes some astounding invention and enormously
  benefits his country by his brains, we pay him his due, for he has really
  accomplished something and been of use to his country. However, we hope to
  make it impossible for idle drones to inhabit this country.I could continue to cite examples indefinitely. The fact remains that two
  worlds are face to face with one another. Our opponents are quite right when
  they say: 'Nothing can reconcile us to the National Socialist world.' How
  could a narrow-minded capitalist ever agree to my principles? It would be
  easier for the Devil to go to church and cross himself with holy water than
  for these people to comprehend the ideas which are accepted facts to us today.
  But we have solved our problems.To take another instance where we are condemned: They claim to be fighting
  for the maintenance of the gold standard as the currency basis. That I can
  well believe, for the gold is in their hands. We, too, once had gold, but
  it was stolen and extorted from us. When I came to power, it was not malice
  which made me abandon the gold standard. Germany simply had no gold left.
  Consequently, quitting the gold standard presented no difficulties, for it
  is always easy to part with what one does not have. We had no gold. We had
  no foreign exchange. They had all been stolen and extorted from us during
  the previous fifteen years. But, my fellow countrymen, I did not regret it,
  for we have constructed our economic system on a wholly different basis.
  In our eyes, gold is not of value in itself. It is only an agent by which
  nations can be suppressed and dominated.When I took over the government, I had only one hope on which to build, namely,
  the efficiency and ability of the German nation and the German workingman;
  the intelligence of our inventors, engineers, technicians, chemists, and
  so forth. I built on the strength which animates our economic system. One
  simple question faced me: Are we to perish because we have no gold; am I
  to believe in a phantom which spells our destruction? I championed the opposite
  opinion: Even though we have no gold, we have capacity for work.The German capacity for work is our gold and our capital, and with this gold
  I can compete successfully with any power in the world. We want to live in
  houses which have to be built. Hence, the workers must build them, and the
  raw materials required must be procured by work. My whole economic system
  has been built up on the conception of work. We have solved our problems
  while, amazingly enough, the capitalist countries and their currencies have
  suffered bankruptcy.Sterling can find no market today. Throw it at any one and he will step aside
  to avoid being hit. But our Reichsmark, which is backed by no gold, has remained
  stable. Why? It has no gold cover; it is backed by you and by your work.
  You have helped me to keep the mark stable. German currency, with no gold
  coverage, is worth more today than gold itself. It signifies unceasing
  production. This we owe to the German farmer, who has worked from daybreak
  till nightfall. This we owe to the German worker, who has given us his whole
  strength. The whole problem has been solved in one instant, as if by magic.My dear friends, if I had stated publicly eight or nine years ago: 'In seven
  or eight years the problem of how to provide work for the unemployed will
  be solved, and the problem then will be where to find workers,' I should
  have harmed my cause. Every one would have declared: 'The man is mad. It
  is useless to talk to him, much less to support him. Nobody should vote for
  him. He is a fantastic creature.' Today, however, all this has come true.
  Today, the only question for us is where to find workers. That, my fellow
  countrymen, is the blessing which work brings.Work alone can create new work; money cannot create work. Work alone can
  create values, values with which to reward those who work. The work of one
  man makes it possible for another to live and continue to work. And when
  we have mobilized the working capacity of our people to its utmost, each
  individual worker will receive more and more of the world's goods.We have incorporated seven million unemployed into our economic system; we
  have transformed another six millions from part-time into full-time workers;
  we are even working overtime. And all this is paid for in cash in Reichsmarks
  which maintained their value in peacetime. In wartime we had to ration its
  purchasing capacity, not in order to devalue it, but simply to earmark a
  portion of our industry for war production to guide us to victory in the
  struggle for the future of Germany.My fellow-countrymen, we are also building a world here, a world of mutual
  work, a world of mutual effort, and a world of mutual anxieties and mutual
  duties. It did not surprise me that other countries started rationing only
  after two, three, five, and seven months, and in some cases only after a
  year. Believe me, in all these countries, this was not due to chance but
  to policy. Many a German may have been surprised that food cards appeared
  on the first morning of the war. Yet, there are, of course, two sides to
  this food card system. Some people may say: 'Wouldn't it be better to exclude
  this or that commodity from rationing? What use are a few grams of coffee
  when nobody gets much anyway? Without rationing, at least a few would get
  more.' Now that is exactly what we want to avoid. We want to avoid one person
  having more of the most vital commodities than another. There are other things
  - a valuable painting, for instance. Not everybody is in a position to buy
  a Titian, even if he had the money. Because Titian painted only a few pictures,
  only a few can afford his work. This or that man can buy one if he has enough
  money. He spends it, and it circulates through the country. But in the case
  of food, everybody must be served alike.The other countries waited to see how things would develop. The question
  was asked: 'Will meat be rationed?' That was the first sounding of a warning.
  In other words: 'If you are a capitalist, cover your requirements, buy yourself
  a refrigerator and hoard up a few sides of bacon.''Shall we ration coffee? There are two opinions as to whether it should be
  rationed or not. It might be possible that in the end those who think that
  coffee should be rationed might triumph.' They devote four whole weeks to
  the discussion and everybody who has a spark of egotism - as they have in
  the democracies - says to himself: 'Aha, so coffee is to be rationed in the
  near future; let us hoard it.' Then, when the supplies are exhausting themselves,
  it is at last rationed.It was just this that we wanted to avoid. That is why in order to ensure
  equal distribution, we have had to impose certain restrictions from the very
  start. And we are not well disposed toward those who do not observe regulations.One thing is certain, my fellow-countrymen: All in all, we have today a state
  with a different economic and political orientation from that of the Western
  democracies.Well, it must now be made possible for the British worker to travel. It is
  remarkable that they should at last hit upon the idea that traveling should
  be something not for millionaires alone, but for the people too. In this
  country, the problem was solved some time ago. In the other countries - as
  is shown by their whole economic structure - the selfishness of a relatively
  small stratum rules under the mask of democracy. This stratum is neither
  checked nor controlled by anyone.It is therefore understandable if an Englishman says: 'We do not want our
  world to be subject to any sort of collapse.' Quite so. The English know
  full well that their Empire is not menaced by us. But they say quite truthfully:
  'If the ideas that are popular in Germany are not completely eliminated,
  they might become popular among our own people, and that is the danger. We
  do not want this.' It would do no harm if they did become popular there,
  but these people are just as narrow-minded as many once were in Germany.
  In this respect they prefer to remain bound to their conservative methods.
  They do not wish to depart from them, and do not conceal the fact.They say, 'The German methods do not suit us at all.'And what are these methods? You know, my comrades, that I have destroyed
  nothing in Germany. I have always proceeded very carefully, because I believe
  - as I have already said - that we cannot afford to wreck anything. I am
  proud that the Revolution of 1933 was brought to pass without breaking a
  single windowpane. Nevertheless, we have wrought enormous changes.I wish to put before you a few basic facts: The first is that in the capitalistic
  democratic world the most important principle of economy is that the people
  exist for trade and industry, and that these in turn exist for capital. We
  have reversed this principle by making capital exist for trade and industry,
  and trade and industry exist for the people. In other words, the people come
  first. Everything else is but a means to this end. When an economic system
  is not capable of feeding and clothing a people, then it is bad, regardless
  of whether a few hundred people say: 'As far as I am concerned it is good,
  excellent; my dividends are splendid.'However, the dividends do not interest me at all. Here we have drawn the
  line. They may then retort: 'Well, look here, that is just what we mean.
  You jeopardize liberty.'Yes, certainly, we jeopardize the liberty to profiteer at the expense of
  the community, and, if necessary, we even abolish it. British capitalists,
  to mention only one instance, can pocket dividends of 76, 80, 95, 140, and
  even 160 per cent from their armament industry. Naturally they say: 'If the
  German methods grow apace and should prove victorious, this sort of thing
  will stop.'They are perfectly right. I should never tolerate such a state of affairs.
  In my eyes, a 6 per cent dividend is sufficient. Even from this 6 per cent
  we deduct one-half and, as for the rest, we must have definite proof that
  it is invested in the interest of the country as a whole. In other words,
  no individual has the right to dispose arbitrarily of money which ought to
  be invested for the good of the country. If he disposes of it sensibly, well
  and good; if not, the National Socialist state will intervene.To take another instance, besides dividends there are the so-called directors'
  fees. You probably have no idea how appallingly active a board of directors
  is. Once a year its members have to make a journey. They have to go to the
  station, get into a first-class compartment and travel to some place or other.
  They arrive at an appointed office at about 10 or 11 A.M. There they must
  listen to a report. When the report has been read, they must listen to a
  few comments on it. They may be kept in their seats until 1 P.M. or even
  2. Shortly after 2 o'clock they rise from their chairs and set out on their
  homeward journey, again, of course, traveling first class. It is hardly
  surprising that they claim 3,000, 4,000, or even 5,000 as compensation for
  this: Our directors formerly did the same - for what a lot of time it costs
  them! Such effort had to be made worth while! Of course, we have got rid
  of all this nonsense, which was merely veiled profiteering and even bribery.In Germany, the people, without any doubt, decide their existence. They determine
  the principles of their government. In fact it has been possible in this
  country to incorporate many of the broad masses into the National Socialist
  party, that gigantic organization embracing millions and having millions
  of officials drawn from the people themselves. This principle is extended
  to the highest ranks.For the first time in German history, we have a state which has absolutely
  abolished all social prejudices in regard to political appointments as well
  as in private life. I myself am the best proof of this. Just imagine: I am
  not even a lawyer, and yet I am your Leader!It is not only in ordinary life that we have succeeded in appointing the
  best among the people for every position. We have Reichsstatthalters who
  were formerly agricultural laborers or locksmiths. Yes, we have even succeeded
  in breaking down prejudice in a place where it was most deep-seated -in the
  fighting forces. Thousands of officers are being promoted from the ranks
  today. We have done away with prejudice. We have generals who were ordinary
  soldiers and noncommissioned officers twenty-two and twenty-three years ago.
  In this instance, too, we have overcome all social obstacles. Thus, we are
  building up our life for the future.As you know we have countless schools, national political educational
  establishments, Adolf Hitler schools, and so on. To these schools we send
  gifted children of the broad masses, children of working men, farmers' sons
  whose parents could never have afforded a higher education for their children.
  We take them in gradually. They are educated here, sent to the Ordensburgen,
  to the Party, later to take their place in the State where they will some
  day fill the highest posts....Opposed to this there stands a completely different world. In the world the
  highest ideal is the struggle for wealth, for capital, for family possessions,
  for personal egoism; everything else is merely a means to such ends. Two
  worlds confront each other today. We know perfectly well that if we are defeated
  in this war it would not only be the end of our National Socialist work of
  reconstruction, but the end of the German people as a whole. For without
  its powers of coordination, the German people would starve. Today the masses
  dependent on us number 120 or 130 millions, of which 85 millions alone are
  our own people. We remain ever aware of this fact.On the other hand, that other world says: 'If we lose, our world-wide
  capitalistic system will collapse. For it is we who save hoarded gold. It
  is lying in our cellars and will lose its value. If the idea that work is
  the decisive factor spreads abroad, what will happen to us? We shall have
  bought our gold in vain. Our whole claim to world dominion can then no longer
  be maintained. The people will do away with their dynasties of high finance.
  They will present their social claims, and the whole world system will be
  overthrown.'I can well understand that they declare: 'Let us prevent this at all costs;
  it must be prevented.' They can see exactly how our nation has been
  reconstructed. You see it clearly. For instance, there we see a state ruled
  by a numerically small upper class. They send their sons to their own schools,
  to Eton. We have Adolf Hitler schools or national political educational
  establishments. On the one hand, the sons of plutocrats, financial magnates;
  on the other, the children of the people. Etonians and Harrovians exclusively
  in leading positions over there; in this country, men of the people in charge
  of the State.These are the two worlds. I grant that one of the two must succumb. Yes,
  one or the other. But if we were to succumb, the German people would succumb
  with us. If the other were to succumb, I am convinced that the nations will
  become free for the first time. We are not fighting individual Englishmen
  or Frenchmen. We have nothing against them. For years I proclaimed this as
  the aim of my foreign policy. We demanded nothing of them, nothing at all.
  When they started the war they could not say: 'We are doing so because the
  Germans asked this or that of us.' They said, on the contrary: 'We are declaring
  war on you because the German system of Government does not suit us; because
  we fear it might spread to our own people.' For that reason they are carrying
  on this war. They wanted to blast the German nation back to the time of
  Versailles, to the indescribable misery of those days. But they have made
  a great mistake.If in this war everything points to the fact that gold is fighting against
  work, capitalism against peoples, and reaction against the progress of humanity,
  then work, the peoples, and progress will be victorious. Even the support
  of the Jewish race will not avail the others.I have seen all this coming for years. What did I ask of the other world?
  Nothing but the right for Germans to reunite and the restoration of all that
  had been taken from them - nothing which would have meant a loss to the other
  nations. How often have I stretched out my hand to them? Ever since I came
  into power. I had not the slightest wish to rearm.For what do armaments mean? They absorb so much labor. It was I who regarded
  work as being of decisive importance, who wished to employ the working capacity
  of Germany for other plans. I think the news is already out that, after all,
  I have some fairly important plans in my mind, vast and splendid plans for
  my people. It is my ambition to make the German people rich and to make the
  German homeland beautiful. I want the standard of living of the individual
  raised. I want us to have the most beautiful and the finest civilization.
  I should like the theater - in fact, the whole of German civilization - to
  benefit all the people and not to exist only for the upper ten thousand,
  as is the case in England.The plans which we had in mind were tremendous, and I needed workers in order
  to realize them. Armament only deprives me of workers. I made proposals to
  limit armaments. I was ridiculed. The only answer I received was 'No.' I
  proposed the limitation of certain types of armament. That was refused. I
  proposed that airplanes should be altogether eliminated from warfare. That
  also was refused. I suggested that bombers should be limited. That was refused.
  They said: 'That is just how we wish to force our regime upon you.'I am not a man who does things by halves. If it becomes necessary for me
  to defend myself, I defend myself with unlimited zeal. When I saw that the
  same old warmongers of the World War in Britain were mobilizing once more
  against the great new German revival, I realized that this struggle would
  have to be fought once more, that the other side did not want peace.It was quite obvious: Who was I before the Great War? An unknown, nameless
  individual. What was I during the war? A quite inconspicuous, ordinary soldier.
  I was in no way responsible for the Great War. However, who are the rulers
  of Britain today? They are the same people who were warmongering before the
  Great War, the same Churchill who was the vilest agitator among them during
  the Great War; Chamberlain, who recently died and who at that time agitated
  in exactly the same way. It was the whole gang, members of the same group,
  who believe that they can annihilate nations with the blast of the trumpets
  of Jericho.The old spirits have once more come to life, and it is against them that
  I have armed the German people. I, too, had convictions: I myself served
  as a soldier during the Great War and know what it means to be fired at by
  others without being able to shoot back. I know what it means not to have
  any ammunition or to have too little, what it means always to be beaten by
  the other side. I gained my wholehearted faith in the German people and in
  the future. during those years, from my knowledge of the German soldier,
  of the ordinary man in the trenches. He was the great hero in my opinion.
  Of course, the other classes also did everything they could. But there was
  a difference.The Germany of that time certainly seemed quite a tolerable country to anybody
  living at home amid wealth and luxury. One could have his share of everything,
  of culture, of the pleasures of life, and so on. He could enjoy German art
  and many other things; he could travel through the German countryside; he
  could visit German towns and so forth. What more could he wish for? Naturally,
  he defended it all.On the other hand, however, there was the ordinary common soldier. This
  unimportant proletarian, who scarcely had sufficient to eat, who always had
  to slave for his existence, nevertheless fought at the front like a hero
  for four long years. It was in him that I placed my trust, and it is with
  his help that I won back confidence in myself. When the others had lost their
  faith in Germany, I regained mine, never losing sight of the ordinary man
  in the street. I knew that Germany could not perish.Germany will not perish so long as she possesses such men. I have also seen
  how these combatants, these soldiers again and again faced an enemy who could
  annihilate them simply by his superior material. I was not of the opinion
  at that time that the British were personally superior to us. Only a madman
  can say that I have ever had any inferiority complex with respect to the
  British. I have never had any such feeling of inferiority.The problem of the individual German against the individual Englishman did
  not present itself at all at that time. Even at that time they went whining
  round the whole world until they found support. This time I was determined
  to make preparations throughout the world to extend our position, and secondly,
  to arm at home in such a manner that the German soldier would no longer be
  obliged to stand alone at the front, exposed to superior forces.The trouble has come. I did everything humanly possible - going almost to
  the point of self-abasement - to avoid it. I repeatedly made offers to the
  British. I had discussions with their diplomats here and entreated them to
  be sensible. But it was all in vain. They wanted war, and they made no secret
  of it. For seven years Churchill had been saying: 'I want war.' Now he has
  got it.It was regrettable to me that nations whom I wished to bring together and
  who, in my opinion, could have cooperated to such good purpose, should now
  be at war with one another. But these gentlemen are aiming at destroying
  the National Socialist State, at disrupting the German people and dividing
  them again into their component parts. Such were the war aims they proclaimed
  in the past and such are their war aims today. However, this time they will
  be surprised, and I believe that they have already had a foretaste of it.There are among you, my fellow-countrymen, many old soldiers who went through
  the Great War and who know perfectly well what space and time mean. Many
  of you fought in the East during that war, and all the names which you read
  about in 1939 were still quite familiar to you. Perhaps many of you marched
  in bad weather or under the burning sun at that time. The roads were endless.
  And how desperate was the struggle for every inch of ground. How much blood
  it cost merely to advance slowly, mile by mile. Think of the pace at which
  we covered these distances this time. Eighteen days, and the state which
  wished to cut us to pieces at the gates of Berlin was crushed.Then came the British attack on Norway. As a matter of fact, I was told by
  those Englishmen who always know everything that we had slept through the
  winter. One great statesman even assured me that I had missed the bus. Yet
  we arrived just in time to get into it before the British. We had suddenly
  reawakened. In a few days we made sure of this. We took Norwegian positions
  as far north as Kirkenes, and I need not tell you that no one will take the
  soil on which a German soldier stands.And then they wanted to be cleverer and speedier in the West - in Holland
  and Belgium. It led to an offensive that many, especially among our older
  men, envisaged with fear and anxiety. I am perfectly well aware of what many
  were thinking at that time. They had experienced the Great War on the Western
  Front, all the battles in Flanders, in Artois, and around Verdun. They all
  imagined: 'Today the Maginot line is there. How can it be taken? Above all,
  how much blood will it cost; what sacrifices will it call for; how long will
  it take?' Within six weeks this campaign too, had been concluded.Belgium, Holland, and France were vanquished; the Channel Coast was occupied;
  our batteries were brought into position there and our bases established.
  Of these positions, too, do I say: 'No power in the world can drive us out
  of this region against our will.''And now my fellow-countrymen, let us think of the sacrifices. For the
  individual, they are very great. The woman who has lost her husband has lost
  her all, and the same is true of the child that has lost its father. The
  mother who has sacrificed her child, and the betrothed or the sweetheart
  who have been parted from loved ones never to see them again have all made
  great sacrifices. However, if we add all these losses together and compare
  them with the sacrifices of the Great War, then - however great they may
  be for the individual - they are incomparably small. Consider that we have
  not nearly so many dead as Germany had in 1870-71 in the struggle against
  France. We have broken the ring encircling Germany by these sacrifices. The
  number of wounded is also extremely small, merely a fraction of what was
  expected.For all this, our thanks are due to our magnificent army, inspired by a new
  spirit and into which the spirit of our national community has also penetrated.
  The army now really knows for what it is fighting. We owe thanks to our soldiers
  for their tremendous achievements. But the German soldier gives thanks to
  you, the munitions workers, for forging the weapons for his use. For this
  is the first time that he has gone into battle without feeling that he was
  inferior to the enemy in numbers or that his weapons were of poorer quality.
  Our weapons were better in every respect.That is your doing; the result of your workmanship, of your industry, your
  capacity, your devotion. Millions of German families still have their
  breadwinners today and will have them in the future, innumerable fathers
  and mothers still have their sons - and their thanks are due to you, my munitions
  workers. You have forged for them the weapons with which they were able to
  go forward to victory, weapons which today give them so much confidence that
  everyone knows we are not only the best soldiers in the world but that we
  also have the best weapons in the world. Not only is this true today; it
  will be more so in the future.That is the difference between today and the Great War. But not only that.
  Above all, this time the German soldier is not short of ammunition. I do
  not know, my fellow countrymen, but it may be that when exact calculations
  are made after the war, people will perhaps say: 'Sir, you were a spendthrift.
  You had ammunition made which was never used. It is still lying about.' Yes,
  my fellow-countrymen, I have had ammunition made because I went through the
  Great War, because I wished to avoid what happened then and because shells
  are replaceable and bombs are replaceable but men are not.And thus the problem of ammunition in this struggle was no problem at all;
  perhaps only a supply problem. When the struggle was over we had scarcely
  used a month's production. Today we are armed for any eventuality, whatever
  Britain may do. Every week that passes Britain will be dealt heavier blows,
  and if she wishes to set foot anywhere on the Continent she will find us
  ready once more. I know that we are not out of practice. I hope that the
  British have also forgotten nothing.As far as the war in the air is concerned, this too, I hoped to avert. We
  accepted it. We shall fight it to the finish. I did not want it. I always
  struggled against it. We did not wage such a war during the whole of the
  Polish campaign. I did not allow any night attacks to be carried out. In
  London they said: 'Yes, because you couldn't fly by night.'In the meantime, they have noticed whether we can fly by night or not. Naturally,
  it is not possible to aim so well at night and I wanted to attack military
  objects only, to attack at the front only, to fight against soldiers, not
  against women and children. That is why we refrained from night attacks.
  We did not use this method in France. We carried out no night attacks from
  the air. When we attacked Paris, only the munitions factories were our
  objectives. Our airmen aimed with wonderful precision. Anybody who saw it
  could convince himself of that.Then it occurred to that great strategist, Churchill, to commence unrestricted
  war from the air by night. He began it in Freiburg im Breisgau and has continued
  it. Not one munitions plant has been demolished. Yet according to British
  news reports, the one in which we are at present assembled is nothing but
  a mass of craters. They have not even caused a single munitions factory to
  cease production. On the other hand, they have unfortunately hit many families,
  helpless women and children. Hospitals have been one of their favorite
  objectives. Why? It is inexplainable. You yourselves, here in Berlin, know
  how often they have bombed our hospitals.Very well, I waited for a month, because I thought that after the conclusion
  of the campaign in France the British would give up this method of warfare.
  I was mistaken. I waited for a second month and a third month. If bombs were
  to be dropped I could not assume the responsibility before the German people
  of allowing my own countrymen to be destroyed while sparing foreigners. Now,
  this war, too, had to be fought to its end. And it is being fought; fought
  with all the determination, with all the materials, with all the means and
  all the courage at our disposal. The time for the decisive conflict will
  arrive. You may be sure it will take place. However, I should like to tell
  these gentlemen one thing: It is we who shall determine the time for it.
  And on this point I am cautious. We might perhaps have been able to attack
  in the West during the autumn of last year, but I wanted to wait for good
  weather. And I think it was worth while waiting.We ourselves are so convinced that our weapons will be successful that we
  can allow ourselves time. The German people will certainly hold out. I believe
  that they will be grateful to me if I bide my time and thus save them untold
  sacrifices.It is one of the characteristics of the National Socialist State that even
  in warfare, at times when it is not absolutely necessary, it is sparing of
  human life. After all, the lives of our fellow-citizens are at stake.In the campaign in Poland we forbade many attacks or rapid advances, because
  we were convinced that a week or a fortnight later the problem would solve
  itself.We have gained many great successes without sacrificing a single man. That
  was also the case in the West. It must remain so in the future. We have no
  desire to gain any successes or to make any attacks for the sake of prestige.
  We never wish to act except in accordance with sober military principles.
  What has to happen must happen. We wish to avoid everything else. As for
  the rest, all of us hope that reason will again be victorious and peace will
  return. The world must realize one thing, however: Neither military force,
  economic pressure, nor the time factor will ever force Germany to surrender.
  Whatever else may happen, Germany will be the victor in this struggle.I am not the man to give up, to my own disadvantage, a struggle already begun.
  I have proved this by my life in the past and I shall prove to those gentlemen
  - whose knowledge of my life until now has been gathered from the emigre'
  press - that I have remained unchanged in this respect.When I began my political career, I declared to my supporters - they were
  then only a small number of soldiers and workers - 'There is no such word
  as capitulation in your vocabulary or mine.'I do not desire war, but when it is forced upon me I shall wage it as long
  as I have breath in my body. And I can wage it today, because I know that
  the whole German nation is behind me. I am the guardian of its future and
  I act accordingly.I could have made my own life much more easy. I have been fighting for twenty
  years, and I have assumed the burden of all these anxieties and of this
  never-ceasing work, convinced that it must be done for the German people.
  My own life and my own health are of no importance. I know that, above all,
  the German Army, every man and every officer of it, supports me in the same
  spirit. All those fools who imagined that there could ever be any disruption
  here have forgotten that the Third Reich is not the same as the Second. The
  German people stand behind me to a man. And at this point I thank, above
  all, the German workman and the German peasant. They made it possible for
  me to prepare for this struggle and to create, as far as armaments were
  concerned, the necessary conditions for resistance. They also provide me
  with the possibility of continuing the war, however long it may last.I also give special thanks to the women of Germany-to those numberless women,
  who must now perform part of the heavy work of men, who have adapted themselves
  to their war duties with devotion and fanaticism and who are replacing men
  in so many positions. I thank you all - you who are making this personal
  sacrifice, who are bearing the many restrictions that are necessary. I thank
  you in the name of all those who represent the German people today and who
  will be the German people of the future.This struggle is not a struggle for the present but primarily a struggle
  for the future. I stated on September 3, 1939, that time would not conquer
  us, that no economic difficulties would bring us to our knees, and that we
  could still less be defeated by force of arms. The morale of the German people
  guarantees this.The German people will be richly rewarded in the future for all that they
  are doing. When we have won this war it will not have been won by a few
  industrialists or millionaires, or by a few capitalists or aristocrats, or
  by a few bourgeois, or by anyone else.Workers, you must look upon me as your guarantor. I was born a son of the
  people; I have spent all my life struggling for the German people, and when
  this hardest struggle of my life is over there will be new tasks for the
  German people.We have already projected great plans. All of our plans have but one aim:
  to develop still further the great German State, to make that great German
  nation more and more conscious of its existence and, at the same time, to
  give it everything which makes life worth living.We have decided to break down to an ever-increasing degree the barriers
  preventing individuals from developing their faculties and from attaining
  their just due. We are firmly determined to build up a social state which
  must and shall be a model of perfection in every sphere of life....When this war is ended, Germany will set to work in earnest. A great 'Awake!'
  will sound throughout the country. Then the German nation will stop manufacturing
  cannon and will embark on peaceful occupations and the new work of reconstruction
  for the millions. Then we shall show the world for the first time who is
  the real master, capitalism or work. Out of this work will grow the great
  German Reich of which great poets have dreamed. It will be the Germany to
  which every one of her sons will cling with fanatical devotion, because she
  will provide a home even for the poorest. She will teach everyone the meaning
  of life.Should anyone say to me: 'These are mere fantastic dreams, mere visions,'
  I can only reply that when I set out on my course in 1919 as an unknown,
  nameless soldier I built my hopes of the future upon a most vivid imagination.
  Yet all has come true.What I am planning or aiming at today is nothing compared to what I have
  already accomplished and achieved. It will be achieved sooner and more definitely
  than everything already achieved. The road from an unknown and nameless person
  to Fuehrer of the German nation was harder than will be the way from Fuehrer
  of the German nation to creator of the coming peace.