honourable Barnacle who represented it in the House, would smite that
member and cleave him asunder, with a statement of the quantity of
business (for the prevention of business) done by the Circumlocution
Office. Then would that noble or right honourable Barnacle hold in his
hand a paper containing a few figures, to which, with the permission
of the House, he would entreat its attention. Then would the inferior
Barnacles exclaim, obeying orders,'Hear, Hear, Hear!' and 'Read!' Then
would the noble or right honourable Barnacle perceive, sir, from this
little document, which he thought might carry conviction even to the
perversest mind (Derisive laughter and cheering from the Barnacle fry),
that within the short compass of the last financial half-year, this
much-maligned Department (Cheers) had written and received fifteen
thousand letters (Loud cheers), had written twenty-four thousand minutes
(Louder cheers), and thirty-two thousand five hundred and seventeen
memoranda (Vehement cheering). Nay, an ingenious gentleman connected
with the Department, and himself a valuable public servant, had done
him the favour to make a curious calculation of the amount of stationery
consumed in it during the same period. It formed a part of this same
short document; and he derived from it the remarkable fact that the
sheets of foolscap paper it had devoted to the public service would pave
the footways on both sides of Oxford Street from end to end, and leave
nearly a quarter of a mile to spare for the park (Immense cheering and
laughter); while of tape--red tape--it had used enough to stretch, in
graceful festoons, from Hyde Park Corner to the General Post Office.
Then, amidst a burst of official exultation, would the noble or right
honourable Barnacle sit down, leaving the mutilated fragments of the
Member on the field. No one, after that exemplary demolition of him,
would have the hardihood to hint that the more the Circumlocution Office
did, the less was done, and that the greatest blessing it could confer
on an unhappy public would be to do nothing.

With sufficient occupation on his hands, now that he had this additional
task--such a task had many and many a serviceable man died of before his
day--Arthur Clennam led a life of slight variety. Regular visits to his
mother's dull sick room, and visits scarcely less regular to Mr Meagles
at Twickenham, were its only changes during many months.

He sadly and sorely missed Little Dorrit. He had been prepared to miss
her very much, but not so much. He knew to the full extent only through
experience, what a large place in his life was left blank when her
familiar little figure went out of it. He felt, too, that he must
relinquish the hope of its return, understanding the family character
sufficiently well to be assured that he and she were divided by a broad
ground of separation. The old interest he had had in her, and her old
trusting reliance on him, were tinged with melancholy in his mind: so
soon had change stolen over them, and so soon had they glided into the
past with other secret tendernesses.

When he received her letter he was greatly moved, but did not the less
sensibly feel that she was far divided from him by more than distance.
It helped him to a clearer and keener perception of the place assigned
him by the family. He saw that he was cherished in her grateful
remembrance secretly, and that they resented him with the jail and the
rest of its belongings.

Through all these meditations which every day of his life crowded about
her, he thought of her otherwise in the old way. She was his innocent
friend, his delicate child, his dear Little Dorrit. This very change
of circumstances fitted curiously in with the habit, begun on the night
when the roses floated away, of considering himself as a much older man
than his years really made him. He regarded her from a point of view
which in its remoteness, tender as it was, he little thought would have
been unspeakable agony to her. He speculated about her future destiny,
and about the husband she might have, with an affection for her which
would have drained her heart of its dearest drop of hope, and broken it.

Everything about him tended to confirm him in the custom of looking on
himself as an elderly man, from whom such aspirations as he had combated
in the case of Minnie Gowan (though that was not so long ago either,
reckoning by months and seasons), were finally departed. His relations
with her father and mother were like those on which a widower son-in-law
might have stood. If the twin sister who was dead had lived to pass away
in the bloom of womanhood, and he had been her husband, the nature of
his intercourse with Mr and Mrs Meagles would probably have been just
what it was. This imperceptibly helped to render habitual the impression
within him, that he had done with, and dismissed that part of life.

He invariably heard of Minnie from them, as telling them in her letters
how happy she was, and how she loved her husband; but inseparable from
that subject, he invariably saw the old cloud on Mr Meagles's face. Mr
Meagles had never been quite so radiant since the marriage as before.
He had never quite recovered the separation from Pet. He was the same
good-humoured, open creature; but as if his face, from being much turned
towards the pictures of his two children which could show him only one
look, unconsciously adopted a characteristic from them, it always had
now, through all its changes of expression, a look of loss in it.

One wintry Saturday when Clennam was at the cottage, the Dowager Mrs
Gowan drove up, in the Hampton Court equipage which pretended to be the
exclusive equipage of so many individual proprietors. She descended, in
her shady ambuscade of green fan, to favour Mr and Mrs Meagles with a
call.

'And how do you both do, Papa and Mama Meagles?' said she, encouraging
her humble connections. 'And when did you last hear from or about my
poor fellow?'

My poor fellow was her son; and this mode of speaking of him politely
kept alive, without any offence in the world, the pretence that he had
fallen a victim to the Meagles' wiles.

'And the dear pretty one?' said Mrs Gowan. 'Have you later news of her
than I have?'

Which also delicately implied that her son had been captured by mere
beauty, and under its fascination had forgone all sorts of worldly
advantages.

'I am sure,' said Mrs Gowan, without straining her attention on the
answers she received, 'it's an unspeakable comfort to know they continue
happy. My poor fellow is of such a restless disposition, and has been
so used to roving about, and to being inconstant and popular among all
manner of people, that it's the greatest comfort in life. I suppose
they're as poor as mice, Papa Meagles?'

Mr Meagles, fidgety under the question, replied, 'I hope not, ma'am. I
hope they will manage their little income.'

'Oh! my dearest Meagles!' returned the lady, tapping him on the arm with
the green fan and then adroitly interposing it between a yawn and
the company, 'how can you, as a man of the world and one of the most
business-like of human beings--for you know you are business-like, and a
great deal too much for us who are not--'

(Which went to the former purpose, by making Mr Meagles out to be an
artful schemer.)

'--How can you talk about their managing their little means? My poor
dear fellow! The idea of his managing hundreds! And the sweet pretty
creature too. The notion of her managing! Papa Meagles! Don't!'

'Well, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, gravely, 'I am sorry to admit, then,
that Henry certainly does anticipate his means.'

'My dear good man--I use no ceremony with you, because we are a kind of
relations;--positively, Mama Meagles,' exclaimed Mrs Gowan cheerfully,
as if the absurd coincidence then flashed upon her for the first time,
'a kind of relations! My dear good man, in this world none of us can
have _everything_ our own way.'

This again went to the former point, and showed Mr Meagles with all good
breeding that, so far, he had been brilliantly successful in his deep
designs. Mrs Gowan thought the hit so good a one, that she dwelt upon
it; repeating 'Not _everything_. No, no; in this world we must not expect
_everything_, Papa Meagles.'

'And may I ask, ma'am,' retorted Mr Meagles, a little heightened in
colour, 'who does expect everything?'

'Oh, nobody, nobody!' said Mrs Gowan. 'I was going to say--but you put
me out. You interrupting Papa, what was I going to say?'

Drooping her large green fan, she looked musingly at Mr Meagles while
she thought about it; a performance not tending to the cooling of that
gentleman's rather heated spirits.

'Ah! Yes, to be sure!' said Mrs Gowan. 'You must remember that my poor
fellow has always been accustomed to expectations. They may have been
realised, or they may not have been realised--'

'Let us say, then, may not have been realised,' observed Mr Meagles.

The Dowager for a moment gave him an angry look; but tossed it off with
her head and her fan, and pursued the tenor of her way in her former
manner.

'It makes no difference. My poor fellow has been accustomed to that
sort of thing, and of course you knew it, and were prepared for the
consequences. I myself always clearly foresaw the consequences, and am
not surprised. And you must not be surprised. In fact, can't be
surprised. Must have been prepared for it.'

Mr Meagles looked at his wife and at Clennam; bit his lip; and coughed.

'And now here's my poor fellow,' Mrs Gowan pursued, 'receiving notice
that he is to hold himself in expectation of a baby, and all the
expenses attendant on such an addition to his family! Poor Henry! But
it can't be helped now; it's too late to help it now. Only don't talk of
anticipating means, Papa Meagles, as a discovery; because that would be
too much.'

'Too much, ma'am?' said Mr Meagles, as seeking an explanation.

'There, there!' said Mrs Gowan, putting him in his inferior place with
an expressive action of her hand. 'Too much for my poor fellow's
mother to bear at this time of day. They are fast married, and can't
be unmarried. There, there! I know that! You needn't tell me that, Papa
Meagles. I know it very well. What was it I said just now? That it was
a great comfort they continued happy. It is to be hoped they will still
continue happy. It is to be hoped Pretty One will do everything she
can to make my poor fellow happy, and keep him contented. Papa and Mama
Meagles, we had better say no more about it. We never did look at this
subject from the same side, and we never shall. There, there! Now I am
good.'

Truly, having by this time said everything she could say in maintenance
of her wonderfully mythical position, and in admonition to Mr Meagles
that he must not expect to bear his honours of alliance too cheaply, Mrs
Gowan was disposed to forgo the rest. If Mr Meagles had submitted to
a glance of entreaty from Mrs Meagles, and an expressive gesture from
Clennam, he would have left her in the undisturbed enjoyment of this
state of mind. But Pet was the darling and pride of his heart; and if he
could ever have championed her more devotedly, or loved her better, than
in the days when she was the sunlight of his house, it would have been
now, when, as its daily grace and delight, she was lost to it.

'Mrs Gowan, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'I have been a plain man all my
life. If I was to try--no matter whether on myself, on somebody else,
or both--any genteel mystifications, I should probably not succeed in
them.'

'Papa Meagles,' returned the Dowager, with an affable smile, but with
the bloom on her cheeks standing out a little more vividly than usual as
the neighbouring surface became paler,'probably not.'

'Therefore, my good madam,' said Mr Meagles, at great pains to
restrain himself, 'I hope I may, without offence, ask to have no such
mystification played off upon me.'

'Mama Meagles,' observed Mrs Gowan, 'your good man is incomprehensible.'

Her turning to that worthy lady was an artifice to bring her into the
discussion, quarrel with her, and vanquish her. Mr Meagles interposed to
prevent that consummation.

'Mother,' said he, 'you are inexpert, my dear, and it is not a fair
match. Let me beg of you to remain quiet. Come, Mrs Gowan, come! Let
us try to be sensible; let us try to be good-natured; let us try to
be fair. Don't you pity Henry, and I won't pity Pet. And don't be
one-sided, my dear madam; it's not considerate, it's not kind. Don't
let us say that we hope Pet will make Henry happy, or even that we hope
Henry will make Pet happy,' (Mr Meagles himself did not look happy as he
spoke the words,) 'but let us hope they will make each other happy.'

'Yes, sure, and there leave it, father,' said Mrs Meagles the
kind-hearted and comfortable.

'Why, mother, no,' returned Mr Meagles, 'not exactly there. I can't
quite leave it there; I must say just half-a-dozen words more. Mrs
Gowan, I hope I am not over-sensitive. I believe I don't look it.'

'Indeed you do not,' said Mrs Gowan, shaking her head and the great
green fan together, for emphasis.

'Thank you, ma'am; that's well. Notwithstanding which, I feel a
little--I don't want to use a strong word--now shall I say hurt?'
asked Mr Meagles at once with frankness and moderation, and with a
conciliatory appeal in his tone.

'Say what you like,' answered Mrs Gowan. 'It is perfectly indifferent to
me.'

'No, no, don't say that,' urged Mr Meagles, 'because that's not
responding amiably. I feel a little hurt when I hear references made to
consequences having been foreseen, and to its being too late now, and so
forth.'

'_Do_ you, Papa Meagles?' said Mrs Gowan. 'I am not surprised.'

'Well, ma'am,' reasoned Mr Meagles, 'I was in hopes you would have been
at least surprised, because to hurt me wilfully on so tender a subject
is surely not generous.'

'I am not responsible,' said Mrs Gowan, 'for your conscience, you know.'

Poor Mr Meagles looked aghast with astonishment.

'If I am unluckily obliged to carry a cap about with me, which is yours
and fits you,' pursued Mrs Gowan, 'don't blame me for its pattern, Papa
Meagles, I beg!'

'Why, good Lord, ma'am!' Mr Meagles broke out, 'that's as much as to
state--'

'Now, Papa Meagles, Papa Meagles,' said Mrs Gowan, who became extremely
deliberate and prepossessing in manner whenever that gentleman became at
all warm, 'perhaps to prevent confusion, I had better speak for myself
than trouble your kindness to speak for me. It's as much as to state,
you begin. If you please, I will finish the sentence. It is as much as
to state--not that I wish to press it or even recall it, for it is of no
use now, and my only wish is to make the best of existing
circumstances--that from the first to the last I always objected to this
match of yours, and at a very late period yielded a most unwilling
consent to it.'

'Mother!' cried Mr Meagles. 'Do you hear this! Arthur! Do you hear
this!'

'The room being of a convenient size,' said Mrs Gowan, looking about
as she fanned herself, 'and quite charmingly adapted in all respects to
conversation, I should imagine I am audible in any part of it.'

Some moments passed in silence, before Mr Meagles could hold himself in
his chair with sufficient security to prevent his breaking out of it at
the next word he spoke. At last he said: 'Ma'am, I am very unwilling to
revive them, but I must remind you what my opinions and my course were,
all along, on that unfortunate subject.'

'O, my dear sir!' said Mrs Gowan, smiling and shaking her head with
accusatory intelligence, 'they were well understood by me, I assure
you.'

'I never, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'knew unhappiness before that time,
I never knew anxiety before that time. It was a time of such distress to
me that--' That Mr Meagles could really say no more about it, in short,
but passed his handkerchief before his face.

'I understood the whole affair,' said Mrs Gowan, composedly looking
over her fan. 'As you have appealed to Mr Clennam, I may appeal to Mr
Clennam, too. He knows whether I did or not.'

'I am very unwilling,' said Clennam, looked to by all parties, 'to take
any share in this discussion, more especially because I wish to preserve
the best understanding and the clearest relations with Mr Henry Gowan.
I have very strong reasons indeed, for entertaining that wish. Mrs Gowan
attributed certain views of furthering the marriage to my friend here,
in conversation with me before it took place; and I endeavoured to
undeceive her. I represented that I knew him (as I did and do) to be
strenuously opposed to it, both in opinion and action.'

'You see?' said Mrs Gowan, turning the palms of her hands towards Mr
Meagles, as if she were Justice herself, representing to him that he had
better confess, for he had not a leg to stand on. 'You see? Very good!
Now Papa and Mama Meagles both!' here she rose; 'allow me to take the
liberty of putting an end to this rather formidable controversy. I will
not say another word upon its merits. I will only say that it is an
additional proof of what one knows from all experience; that this kind
of thing never answers--as my poor fellow himself would say, that it
never pays--in one word, that it never does.'

Mr Meagles asked, What kind of thing?

'It is in vain,' said Mrs Gowan, 'for people to attempt to get on
together who have such extremely different antecedents; who are jumbled
against each other in this accidental, matrimonial sort of way; and who
cannot look at the untoward circumstance which has shaken them together
in the same light. It never does.'

Mr Meagles was beginning, 'Permit me to say, ma'am--'

'No, don't,' returned Mrs Gowan. 'Why should you! It is an ascertained
fact. It never does. I will therefore, if you please, go my way, leaving
you to yours. I shall at all times be happy to receive my poor fellow's
pretty wife, and I shall always make a point of being on the most
affectionate terms with her. But as to these terms, semi-family and
semi-stranger, semi-goring and semi-boring, they form a state of things
quite amusing in its impracticability. I assure you it never does.'

The Dowager here made a smiling obeisance, rather to the room than to
any one in it, and therewith took a final farewell of Papa and Mama
Meagles. Clennam stepped forward to hand her to the Pill-Box which was
at the service of all the Pills in Hampton Court Palace; and she got
into that vehicle with distinguished serenity, and was driven away.

Thenceforth the Dowager, with a light and careless humour, often
recounted to her particular acquaintance how, after a hard trial, she
had found it impossible to know those people who belonged to Henry's
wife, and who had made that desperate set to catch him. Whether she had
come to the conclusion beforehand, that to get rid of them would give
her favourite pretence a better air, might save her some occasional
inconvenience, and could risk no loss (the pretty creature being fast
married, and her father devoted to her), was best known to herself.
Though this history has its opinion on that point too, and decidedly in
the affirmative.




CHAPTER 9. Appearance and Disappearance


'Arthur, my dear boy,' said Mr Meagles, on the evening of the following
day, 'Mother and I have been talking this over, and we don't feel
comfortable in remaining as we are. That elegant connection of
ours--that dear lady who was here yesterday--'

'I understand,' said Arthur.

'Even that affable and condescending ornament of society,' pursued Mr
Meagles, 'may misrepresent us, we are afraid. We could bear a great
deal, Arthur, for her sake; but we think we would rather not bear that,
if it was all the same to her.'

'Good,' said Arthur. 'Go on.'

'You see,' proceeded Mr Meagles 'it might put us wrong with our
son-in-law, it might even put us wrong with our daughter, and it might
lead to a great deal of domestic trouble. You see, don't you?'

'Yes, indeed,' returned Arthur, 'there is much reason in what you say.'
He had glanced at Mrs Meagles, who was always on the good and sensible
side; and a petition had shone out of her honest face that he would
support Mr Meagles in his present inclinings.

'So we are very much disposed, are Mother and I,' said Mr Meagles, 'to
pack up bags and baggage and go among the Allongers and Marshongers once
more. I mean, we are very much disposed to be off, strike right through
France into Italy, and see our Pet.'

'And I don't think,' replied Arthur, touched by the motherly
anticipation in the bright face of Mrs Meagles (she must have been very
like her daughter, once), 'that you could do better. And if you ask me
for my advice, it is that you set off to-morrow.'

'Is it really, though?' said Mr Meagles. 'Mother, this is being backed
in an idea!'

Mother, with a look which thanked Clennam in a manner very agreeable to
him, answered that it was indeed.

'The fact is, besides, Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, the old cloud coming
over his face, 'that my son-in-law is already in debt again, and that I
suppose I must clear him again. It may be as well, even on this account,
that I should step over there, and look him up in a friendly way. Then
again, here's Mother foolishly anxious (and yet naturally too) about
Pet's state of health, and that she should not be left to feel lonesome
at the present time. It's undeniably a long way off, Arthur, and a
strange place for the poor love under all the circumstances. Let her be
as well cared for as any lady in that land, still it is a long way off.
just as Home is Home though it's never so Homely, why you see,' said Mr
Meagles, adding a new version to the proverb, 'Rome is Rome, though it's
never so Romely.'

'All perfectly true,' observed Arthur, 'and all sufficient reasons for
going.'

'I am glad you think so; it decides me. Mother, my dear, you may get
ready. We have lost our pleasant interpreter (she spoke three foreign
languages beautifully, Arthur; you have heard her many a time), and you
must pull me through it, Mother, as well as you can. I require a deal
of pulling through, Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head, 'a deal
of pulling through. I stick at everything beyond a noun-substantive--and
I stick at him, if he's at all a tight one.'

'Now I think of it,' returned Clennam, 'there's Cavalletto. He shall
go with you, if you like. I could not afford to lose him, but you will
bring him safe back.'

'Well! I am much obliged to you, my boy,' said Mr Meagles, turning it
over, 'but I think not. No, I think I'll be pulled through by Mother.
Cavallooro (I stick at his very name to start with, and it sounds like
the chorus to a comic song) is so necessary to you, that I don't like
the thought of taking him away. More than that, there's no saying when
we may come home again; and it would never do to take him away for
an indefinite time. The cottage is not what it was. It only holds two
little people less than it ever did, Pet, and her poor unfortunate maid
Tattycoram; but it seems empty now. Once out of it, there's no knowing
when we may come back to it. No, Arthur, I'll be pulled through by
Mother.'

They would do best by themselves perhaps, after all, Clennam thought;
therefore did not press his proposal.

'If you would come down and stay here for a change, when it wouldn't
trouble you,' Mr Meagles resumed, 'I should be glad to think--and so
would Mother too, I know--that you were brightening up the old place
with a bit of life it was used to when it was full, and that the Babies
on the wall there had a kind eye upon them sometimes. You so belong to
the spot, and to them, Arthur, and we should every one of us have been
so happy if it had fallen out--but, let us see--how's the weather for
travelling now?' Mr Meagles broke off, cleared his throat, and got up to
look out of the window.

They agreed that the weather was of high promise; and Clennam kept the
talk in that safe direction until it had become easy again, when he
gently diverted it to Henry Gowan and his quick sense and agreeable
qualities when he was delicately dealt with; he likewise dwelt on the
indisputable affection he entertained for his wife. Clennam did not fail
of his effect upon good Mr Meagles, whom these commendations greatly
cheered; and who took Mother to witness that the single and cordial
desire of his heart in reference to their daughter's husband, was
harmoniously to exchange friendship for friendship, and confidence for
confidence. Within a few hours the cottage furniture began to be wrapped
up for preservation in the family absence--or, as Mr Meagles expressed
it, the house began to put its hair in papers--and within a few days
Father and Mother were gone, Mrs Tickit and Dr Buchan were posted, as of
yore, behind the parlour blind, and Arthur's solitary feet were rustling
among the dry fallen leaves in the garden walks.

As he had a liking for the spot, he seldom let a week pass without
paying a visit. Sometimes, he went down alone from Saturday to Monday;
sometimes his partner accompanied him; sometimes, he merely strolled for
an hour or two about the house and garden, saw that all was right, and
returned to London again. At all times, and under all circumstances, Mrs
Tickit, with her dark row of curls, and Dr Buchan, sat in the parlour
window, looking out for the family return.

On one of his visits Mrs Tickit received him with the words, 'I
have something to tell you, Mr Clennam, that will surprise you.' So
surprising was the something in question, that it actually brought Mrs
Tickit out of the parlour window and produced her in the garden walk,
when Clennam went in at the gate on its being opened for him.

'What is it, Mrs Tickit?' said he.

'Sir,' returned that faithful housekeeper, having taken him into the
parlour and closed the door; 'if ever I saw the led away and deluded
child in my life, I saw her identically in the dusk of yesterday
evening.'

'You don't mean Tatty--'

'Coram yes I do!' quoth Mrs Tickit, clearing the disclosure at a leap.

'Where?'

'Mr Clennam,' returned Mrs Tickit, 'I was a little heavy in my eyes,
being that I was waiting longer than customary for my cup of tea which
was then preparing by Mary Jane. I was not sleeping, nor what a person
would term correctly, dozing. I was more what a person would strictly
call watching with my eyes closed.'

Without entering upon an inquiry into this curious abnormal condition,
Clennam said, 'Exactly. Well?'

'Well, sir,' proceeded Mrs Tickit, 'I was thinking of one thing and
thinking of another, just as you yourself might. Just as anybody might.'

'Precisely so,' said Clennam. 'Well?'

'And when I do think of one thing and do think of another,' pursued
Mrs Tickit, 'I hardly need to tell you, Mr Clennam, that I think of the
family. Because, dear me! a person's thoughts,' Mrs Tickit said this
with an argumentative and philosophic air, 'however they may stray, will
go more or less on what is uppermost in their minds. They _will_ do it,
sir, and a person can't prevent them.'

Arthur subscribed to this discovery with a nod.

'You find it so yourself, sir, I'll be bold to say,' said Mrs Tickit,
'and we all find it so. It an't our stations in life that changes us, Mr
Clennam; thoughts is free!--As I was saying, I was thinking of one thing
and thinking of another, and thinking very much of the family. Not of
the family in the present times only, but in the past times too. For
when a person does begin thinking of one thing and thinking of another
in that manner, as it's getting dark, what I say is, that all times
seem to be present, and a person must get out of that state and consider
before they can say which is which.'

He nodded again; afraid to utter a word, lest it should present any new
opening to Mrs Tickit's conversational powers.

'In consequence of which,' said Mrs Tickit, 'when I quivered my eyes and
saw her actual form and figure looking in at the gate, I let them close
again without so much as starting, for that actual form and figure came
so pat to the time when it belonged to the house as much as mine or your
own, that I never thought at the moment of its having gone away. But,
sir, when I quivered my eyes again, and saw that it wasn't there, then
it all flooded upon me with a fright, and I jumped up.'

'You ran out directly?' said Clennam.

'I ran out,' assented Mrs Tickit, 'as fast as ever my feet would carry
me; and if you'll credit it, Mr Clennam, there wasn't in the whole
shining Heavens, no not so much as a finger of that young woman.'

Passing over the absence from the firmament of this novel constellation,
Arthur inquired of Mrs Tickit if she herself went beyond the gate?

'Went to and fro, and high and low,' said Mrs Tickit, 'and saw no sign
of her!'

He then asked Mrs Tickit how long a space of time she supposed there
might have been between the two sets of ocular quiverings she had
experienced? Mrs Tickit, though minutely circumstantial in her reply,
had no settled opinion between five seconds and ten minutes. She was so
plainly at sea on this part of the case, and had so clearly been
startled out of slumber, that Clennam was much disposed to regard the
appearance as a dream. Without hurting Mrs Tickit's feelings with that
infidel solution of her mystery, he took it away from the cottage with
him; and probably would have retained it ever afterwards if a
circumstance had not soon happened to change his opinion.

He was passing at nightfall along the Strand, and the lamp-lighter was
going on before him, under whose hand the street-lamps, blurred by the
foggy air, burst out one after another, like so many blazing sunflowers
coming into full-blow all at once,--when a stoppage on the pavement,
caused by a train of coal-waggons toiling up from the wharves at the
river-side, brought him to a stand-still. He had been walking quickly,
and going with some current of thought, and the sudden check given to
both operations caused him to look freshly about him, as people under
such circumstances usually do.

Immediately, he saw in advance--a few people intervening, but still
so near to him that he could have touched them by stretching out
his arm--Tattycoram and a strange man of a remarkable appearance: a
swaggering man, with a high nose, and a black moustache as false in its
colour as his eyes were false in their expression, who wore his heavy
cloak with the air of a foreigner. His dress and general appearance were
those of a man on travel, and he seemed to have very recently joined
the girl. In bending down (being much taller than she was), listening
to whatever she said to him, he looked over his shoulder with the
suspicious glance of one who was not unused to be mistrustful that his
footsteps might be dogged. It was then that Clennam saw his face; as
his eyes lowered on the people behind him in the aggregate, without
particularly resting upon Clennam's face or any other.

He had scarcely turned his head about again, and it was still bent down,
listening to the girl, when the stoppage ceased, and the obstructed
stream of people flowed on. Still bending his head and listening to the
girl, he went on at her side, and Clennam followed them, resolved to
play this unexpected play out, and see where they went.

He had hardly made the determination (though he was not long about it),
when he was again as suddenly brought up as he had been by the stoppage.
They turned short into the Adelphi,--the girl evidently leading,--and
went straight on, as if they were going to the Terrace which overhangs
the river.

There is always, to this day, a sudden pause in that place to the roar
of the great thoroughfare. The many sounds become so deadened that the
change is like putting cotton in the ears, or having the head thickly
muffled. At that time the contrast was far greater; there being no small
steam-boats on the river, no landing places but slippery wooden stairs
and foot-causeways, no railroad on the opposite bank, no hanging bridge
or fish-market near at hand, no traffic on the nearest bridge of stone,
nothing moving on the stream but watermen's wherries and coal-lighters.
Long and broad black tiers of the latter, moored fast in the mud as if
they were never to move again, made the shore funereal and silent after
dark; and kept what little water-movement there was, far out towards
mid-stream. At any hour later than sunset, and not least at that hour
when most of the people who have anything to eat at home are going home
to eat it, and when most of those who have nothing have hardly yet slunk
out to beg or steal, it was a deserted place and looked on a deserted
scene.

Such was the hour when Clennam stopped at the corner, observing the girl
and the strange man as they went down the street. The man's footsteps
were so noisy on the echoing stones that he was unwilling to add the
sound of his own. But when they had passed the turning and were in the
darkness of the dark corner leading to the terrace, he made after them
with such indifferent appearance of being a casual passenger on his way,
as he could assume.

When he rounded the dark corner, they were walking along the terrace
towards a figure which was coming towards them. If he had seen it by
itself, under such conditions of gas-lamp, mist, and distance, he might
not have known it at first sight, but with the figure of the girl to
prompt him, he at once recognised Miss Wade.

He stopped at the corner, seeming to look back expectantly up the street
as if he had made an appointment with some one to meet him there; but he
kept a careful eye on the three. When they came together, the man took
off his hat, and made Miss Wade a bow. The girl appeared to say a few
words as though she presented him, or accounted for his being late, or
early, or what not; and then fell a pace or so behind, by herself. Miss
Wade and the man then began to walk up and down; the man having the
appearance of being extremely courteous and complimentary in manner;
Miss Wade having the appearance of being extremely haughty.

When they came down to the corner and turned, she was saying, 'If I
pinch myself for it, sir, that is my business. Confine yourself to
yours, and ask me no question.'

'By Heaven, ma'am!' he replied, making her another bow. 'It was my
profound respect for the strength of your character, and my admiration
of your beauty.'

'I want neither the one nor the other from any one,' said she, 'and
certainly not from you of all creatures. Go on with your report.'

'Am I pardoned?' he asked, with an air of half abashed gallantry.

'You are paid,' she said, 'and that is all you want.'

Whether the girl hung behind because she was not to hear the business,
or as already knowing enough about it, Clennam could not determine. They
turned and she turned. She looked away at the river, as she walked
with her hands folded before her; and that was all he could make of
her without showing his face. There happened, by good fortune, to be a
lounger really waiting for some one; and he sometimes looked over the
railing at the water, and sometimes came to the dark corner and looked
up the street, rendering Arthur less conspicuous.

When Miss Wade and the man came back again, she was saying, 'You must
wait until to-morrow.'

'A thousand pardons?' he returned. 'My faith! Then it's not convenient
to-night?'

'No. I tell you I must get it before I can give it to you.'

She stopped in the roadway, as if to put an end to the conference. He of
course stopped too. And the girl stopped.

'It's a little inconvenient,' said the man. 'A little. But, Holy Blue!
that's nothing in such a service. I am without money to-night, by
chance. I have a good banker in this city, but I would not wish to draw
upon the house until the time when I shall draw for a round sum.'

'Harriet,' said Miss Wade, 'arrange with him--this gentleman here--for
sending him some money to-morrow.' She said it with a slur of the word
gentleman which was more contemptuous than any emphasis, and walked
slowly on.

The man bent his head again, and the girl spoke to him as they both
followed her. Clennam ventured to look at the girl as they moved away.
He could note that her rich black eyes were fastened upon the man with a
scrutinising expression, and that she kept at a little distance from
him, as they walked side by side to the further end of the terrace.

A loud and altered clank upon the pavement warned him, before he could
discern what was passing there, that the man was coming back alone.
Clennam lounged into the road, towards the railing; and the man passed
at a quick swing, with the end of his cloak thrown over his shoulder,
singing a scrap of a French song.

The whole vista had no one in it now but himself. The lounger had
lounged out of view, and Miss Wade and Tattycoram were gone. More than
ever bent on seeing what became of them, and on having some information
to give his good friend, Mr Meagles, he went out at the further end of
the terrace, looking cautiously about him. He rightly judged that, at
first at all events, they would go in a contrary direction from their
late companion. He soon saw them in a neighbouring bye-street, which was
not a thoroughfare, evidently allowing time for the man to get well
out of their way. They walked leisurely arm-in-arm down one side of the
street, and returned on the opposite side. When they came back to the
street-corner, they changed their pace for the pace of people with an
object and a distance before them, and walked steadily away. Clennam, no
less steadily, kept them in sight.

They crossed the Strand, and passed through Covent Garden (under the
windows of his old lodging where dear Little Dorrit had come that
night), and slanted away north-east, until they passed the great
building whence Tattycoram derived her name, and turned into the Gray's
Inn Road. Clennam was quite at home here, in right of Flora, not to
mention the Patriarch and Pancks, and kept them in view with ease. He
was beginning to wonder where they might be going next, when that wonder
was lost in the greater wonder with which he saw them turn into the
Patriarchal street. That wonder was in its turn swallowed up on the
greater wonder with which he saw them stop at the Patriarchal door. A
low double knock at the bright brass knocker, a gleam of light into the
road from the opened door, a brief pause for inquiry and answer and the
door was shut, and they were housed.

After looking at the surrounding objects for assurance that he was
not in an odd dream, and after pacing a little while before the house,
Arthur knocked at the door. It was opened by the usual maid-servant,
and she showed him up at once, with her usual alacrity, to Flora's
sitting-room.

There was no one with Flora but Mr F.'s Aunt, which respectable
gentlewoman, basking in a balmy atmosphere of tea and toast, was
ensconced in an easy-chair by the fireside, with a little table at her
elbow, and a clean white handkerchief spread over her lap on which
two pieces of toast at that moment awaited consumption. Bending over
a steaming vessel of tea, and looking through the steam, and breathing
forth the steam, like a malignant Chinese enchantress engaged in the
performance of unholy rites, Mr F.'s Aunt put down her great teacup and
exclaimed, 'Drat him, if he an't come back again!'

It would seem from the foregoing exclamation that this uncompromising
relative of the lamented Mr F., measuring time by the acuteness of her
sensations and not by the clock, supposed Clennam to have lately gone
away; whereas at least a quarter of a year had elapsed since he had had
the temerity to present himself before her.

'My goodness Arthur!' cried Flora, rising to give him a cordial
reception, 'Doyce and Clennam what a start and a surprise for though not
far from the machinery and foundry business and surely might be taken
sometimes if at no other time about mid-day when a glass of sherry and a
humble sandwich of whatever cold meat in the larder might not come amiss
nor taste the worse for being friendly for you know you buy it somewhere
and wherever bought a profit must be made or they would never keep the
place it stands to reason without a motive still never seen and learnt
now not to be expected, for as Mr F. himself said if seeing is believing
not seeing is believing too and when you don't see you may fully believe
you're not remembered not that I expect you Arthur Doyce and Clennam to
remember me why should I for the days are gone but bring another teacup
here directly and tell her fresh toast and pray sit near the fire.'

Arthur was in the greatest anxiety to explain the object of his
visit; but was put off for the moment, in spite of himself, by what he
understood of the reproachful purport of these words, and by the genuine
pleasure she testified in seeing him.

'And now pray tell me something all you know,' said Flora, drawing her
chair near to his, 'about the good dear quiet little thing and all the
changes of her fortunes carriage people now no doubt and horses without
number most romantic, a coat of arms of course and wild beasts on their
hind legs showing it as if it was a copy they had done with mouths from
ear to ear good gracious, and has she her health which is the first
consideration after all for what is wealth without it Mr F. himself so
often saying when his twinges came that sixpence a day and find yourself
and no gout so much preferable, not that he could have lived on anything
like it being the last man or that the previous little thing though far
too familiar an expression now had any tendency of that sort much too
slight and small but looked so fragile bless her?'

Mr F.'s Aunt, who had eaten a piece of toast down to the crust, here
solemnly handed the crust to Flora, who ate it for her as a matter of
business. Mr F.'s Aunt then moistened her ten fingers in slow succession
at her lips, and wiped them in exactly the same order on the white
handkerchief; then took the other piece of toast, and fell to work
upon it. While pursuing this routine, she looked at Clennam with an
expression of such intense severity that he felt obliged to look at her
in return, against his personal inclinations.

'She is in Italy, with all her family, Flora,' he said, when the dreaded
lady was occupied again.

'In Italy is she really?' said Flora, 'with the grapes growing
everywhere and lava necklaces and bracelets too that land of poetry with
burning mountains picturesque beyond belief though if the organ-boys
come away from the neighbourhood not to be scorched nobody can wonder
being so young and bringing their white mice with them most humane, and
is she really in that favoured land with nothing but blue about her and
dying gladiators and Belvederes though Mr F. himself did not believe
for his objection when in spirits was that the images could not be true
there being no medium between expensive quantities of linen badly got
up and all in creases and none whatever, which certainly does not seem
probable though perhaps in consequence of the extremes of rich and poor
which may account for it.'

Arthur tried to edge a word in, but Flora hurried on again.

'Venice Preserved too,' said she, 'I think you have been there is it
well or ill preserved for people differ so and Maccaroni if they really
eat it like the conjurors why not cut it shorter, you are acquainted
Arthur--dear Doyce and Clennam at least not dear and most assuredly
not Doyce for I have not the pleasure but pray excuse me--acquainted I
believe with Mantua what _has_ it got to do with Mantua-making for I never
have been able to conceive?'

'I believe there is no connection, Flora, between the two,' Arthur was
beginning, when she caught him up again.

'Upon your word no isn't there I never did but that's like me I run away
with an idea and having none to spare I keep it, alas there was a time
dear Arthur that is to say decidedly not dear nor Arthur neither but you
understand me when one bright idea gilded the what's-his-name horizon of
et cetera but it is darkly clouded now and all is over.'

Arthur's increasing wish to speak of something very different was by
this time so plainly written on his face, that Flora stopped in a tender
look, and asked him what it was?

'I have the greatest desire, Flora, to speak to some one who is now in
this house--with Mr Casby no doubt. Some one whom I saw come in, and
who, in a misguided and deplorable way, has deserted the house of a
friend of mine.'

'Papa sees so many and such odd people,' said Flora, rising, 'that I
shouldn't venture to go down for any one but you Arthur but for you I
would willingly go down in a diving-bell much more a dining-room and
will come back directly if you'll mind and at the same time not mind Mr
F.'s Aunt while I'm gone.'

With those words and a parting glance, Flora bustled out, leaving
Clennam under dreadful apprehension of this terrible charge.

The first variation which manifested itself in Mr F.'s Aunt's demeanour
when she had finished her piece of toast, was a loud and prolonged
sniff. Finding it impossible to avoid construing this demonstration
into a defiance of himself, its gloomy significance being unmistakable,
Clennam looked plaintively at the excellent though prejudiced lady
from whom it emanated, in the hope that she might be disarmed by a meek
submission.

'None of your eyes at me,' said Mr F.'s Aunt, shivering with hostility.
'Take that.'

'That' was the crust of the piece of toast. Clennam accepted the boon
with a look of gratitude, and held it in his hand under the pressure
of a little embarrassment, which was not relieved when Mr F.'s Aunt,
elevating her voice into a cry of considerable power, exclaimed, 'He
has a proud stomach, this chap! He's too proud a chap to eat it!' and,
coming out of her chair, shook her venerable fist so very close to his
nose as to tickle the surface. But for the timely return of Flora, to
find him in this difficult situation, further consequences might
have ensued. Flora, without the least discomposure or surprise, but
congratulating the old lady in an approving manner on being 'very lively
to-night', handed her back to her chair.

'He has a proud stomach, this chap,' said Mr F.'s relation, on being
reseated. 'Give him a meal of chaff!'

'Oh! I don't think he would like that, aunt,' returned Flora.

'Give him a meal of chaff, I tell you,' said Mr F.'s Aunt, glaring round
Flora on her enemy. 'It's the only thing for a proud stomach. Let him
eat up every morsel. Drat him, give him a meal of chaff!'

Under a general pretence of helping him to this refreshment, Flora got
him out on the staircase; Mr F.'s Aunt even then constantly reiterating,
with inexpressible bitterness, that he was 'a chap,' and had a 'proud
stomach,' and over and over again insisting on that equine provision
being made for him which she had already so strongly prescribed.

'Such an inconvenient staircase and so many corner-stairs Arthur,'
whispered Flora, 'would you object to putting your arm round me under my
pelerine?'

With a sense of going down-stairs in a highly-ridiculous manner, Clennam
descended in the required attitude, and only released his fair burden at
the dining-room door; indeed, even there she was rather difficult to
be got rid of, remaining in his embrace to murmur, 'Arthur, for mercy's
sake, don't breathe it to papa!'

She accompanied Arthur into the room, where the Patriarch sat alone,
with his list shoes on the fender, twirling his thumbs as if he had
never left off. The youthful Patriarch, aged ten, looked out of his
picture-frame above him with no calmer air than he. Both smooth heads
were alike beaming, blundering, and bumpy.

'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. I hope you are well, sir, I hope you
are well. Please to sit down, please to sit down.'

'I had hoped, sir,' said Clennam, doing so, and looking round with a
face of blank disappointment, 'not to find you alone.'

'Ah, indeed?' said the Patriarch, sweetly. 'Ah, indeed?'

'I told you so you know papa,' cried Flora.

'Ah, to be sure!' returned the Patriarch. 'Yes, just so. Ah, to be
sure!'

'Pray, sir,'demanded Clennam, anxiously, 'is Miss Wade gone?'

'Miss--? Oh, you call her Wade,' returned Mr Casby. 'Highly proper.'

Arthur quickly returned, 'What do you call her?'

'Wade,' said Mr Casby. 'Oh, always Wade.'

After looking at the philanthropic visage and the long silky white hair
for a few seconds, during which Mr Casby twirled his thumbs, and smiled
at the fire as if he were benevolently wishing it to burn him that he
might forgive it, Arthur began:

'I beg your pardon, Mr Casby--'

'Not so, not so,' said the Patriarch, 'not so.'

'--But, Miss Wade had an attendant with her--a young woman brought up
by friends of mine, over whom her influence is not considered very
salutary, and to whom I should be glad to have the opportunity of giving
the assurance that she has not yet forfeited the interest of those
protectors.'

'Really, really?' returned the Patriarch.

'Will you therefore be so good as to give me the address of Miss Wade?'

'Dear, dear, dear!' said the Patriarch, 'how very unfortunate! If you
had only sent in to me when they were here! I observed the young woman,
Mr Clennam. A fine full-coloured young woman, Mr Clennam, with very dark
hair and very dark eyes. If I mistake not, if I mistake not?'

Arthur assented, and said once more with new expression, 'If you would
be so good as to give me the address.'

'Dear, dear, dear!' exclaimed the Patriarch in sweet regret. 'Tut, tut,
tut! what a pity, what a pity! I have no address, sir. Miss Wade mostly
lives abroad, Mr Clennam. She has done so for some years, and she is (if
I may say so of a fellow-creature and a lady) fitful and uncertain to a
fault, Mr Clennam. I may not see her again for a long, long time. I may
never see her again. What a pity, what a pity!'

Clennam saw now, that he had as much hope of getting assistance out of
the Portrait as out of the Patriarch; but he said nevertheless:

'Mr Casby, could you, for the satisfaction of the friends I have
mentioned, and under any obligation of secrecy that you may consider it
your duty to impose, give me any information at all touching Miss Wade?
I have seen her abroad, and I have seen her at home, but I know nothing
of her. Could you give me any account of her whatever?'

'None,' returned the Patriarch, shaking his big head with his utmost
benevolence. 'None at all. Dear, dear, dear! What a real pity that
she stayed so short a time, and you delayed! As confidential agency
business, agency business, I have occasionally paid this lady money; but
what satisfaction is it to you, sir, to know that?'

'Truly, none at all,' said Clennam.

'Truly,' assented the Patriarch, with a shining face as he
philanthropically smiled at the fire, 'none at all, sir. You hit the
wise answer, Mr Clennam. Truly, none at all, sir.'

His turning of his smooth thumbs over one another as he sat there, was
so typical to Clennam of the way in which he would make the subject
revolve if it were pursued, never showing any new part of it nor
allowing it to make the smallest advance, that it did much to help to
convince him of his labour having been in vain. He might have taken any
time to think about it, for Mr Casby, well accustomed to get on anywhere
by leaving everything to his bumps and his white hair, knew his strength
to lie in silence. So there Casby sat, twirling and twirling, and making
his polished head and forehead look largely benevolent in every knob.

With this spectacle before him, Arthur had risen to go, when from the
inner Dock where the good ship Pancks was hove down when out in no
cruising ground, the noise was heard of that steamer labouring towards
him. It struck Arthur that the noise began demonstratively far off, as
though Mr Pancks sought to impress on any one who might happen to think
about it, that he was working on from out of hearing.

Mr Pancks and he shook hands, and the former brought his employer a
letter or two to sign. Mr Pancks in shaking hands merely scratched his
