over the patient heart. Every day found her something more retiring
than the day before. To pass in and out of the prison unnoticed, and
elsewhere to be overlooked and forgotten, were, for herself, her chief
desires.

To her own room too, strangely assorted room for her delicate youth
and character, she was glad to retreat as often as she could without
desertion of any duty. There were afternoon times when she was
unemployed, when visitors dropped in to play a hand at cards with her
father, when she could be spared and was better away. Then she would
flit along the yard, climb the scores of stairs that led to her room,
and take her seat at the window. Many combinations did those spikes
upon the wall assume, many light shapes did the strong iron weave itself
into, many golden touches fell upon the rust, while Little Dorrit sat
there musing. New zig-zags sprung into the cruel pattern sometimes, when
she saw it through a burst of tears; but beautified or hardened still,
always over it and under it and through it, she was fain to look in her
solitude, seeing everything with that ineffaceable brand.

A garret, and a Marshalsea garret without compromise, was Little
Dorrit's room. Beautifully kept, it was ugly in itself, and had little
but cleanliness and air to set it off; for what embellishment she had
ever been able to buy, had gone to her father's room. Howbeit, for this
poor place she showed an increasing love; and to sit in it alone became
her favourite rest.

Insomuch, that on a certain afternoon during the Pancks mysteries, when
she was seated at her window, and heard Maggy's well-known step coming
up the stairs, she was very much disturbed by the apprehension of being
summoned away. As Maggy's step came higher up and nearer, she trembled
and faltered; and it was as much as she could do to speak, when Maggy at
length appeared.

'Please, Little Mother,' said Maggy, panting for breath, 'you must come
down and see him. He's here.'

'Who, Maggy?'

'Who, o' course Mr Clennam. He's in your father's room, and he says to
me, Maggy, will you be so kind and go and say it's only me.'

'I am not very well, Maggy. I had better not go. I am going to lie down.
See! I lie down now, to ease my head. Say, with my grateful regard, that
you left me so, or I would have come.'

'Well, it an't very polite though, Little Mother,' said the staring
Maggy, 'to turn your face away, neither!'

Maggy was very susceptible to personal slights, and very ingenious in
inventing them. 'Putting both your hands afore your face too!' she went
on. 'If you can't bear the looks of a poor thing, it would be better to
tell her so at once, and not go and shut her out like that, hurting her
feelings and breaking her heart at ten year old, poor thing!'

'It's to ease my head, Maggy.'

'Well, and if you cry to ease your head, Little Mother, let me cry too.
Don't go and have all the crying to yourself,' expostulated Maggy, 'that
an't not being greedy.' And immediately began to blubber.

It was with some difficulty that she could be induced to go back with
the excuse; but the promise of being told a story--of old her great
delight--on condition that she concentrated her faculties upon the
errand and left her little mistress to herself for an hour longer,
combined with a misgiving on Maggy's part that she had left her good
temper at the bottom of the staircase, prevailed. So away she went,
muttering her message all the way to keep it in her mind, and, at the
appointed time, came back.

'He was very sorry, I can tell you,' she announced, 'and wanted to send
a doctor. And he's coming again to-morrow he is and I don't think he'll
have a good sleep to-night along o' hearing about your head, Little
Mother. Oh my! Ain't you been a-crying!'

'I think I have, a little, Maggy.'

'A little! Oh!'

'But it's all over now--all over for good, Maggy. And my head is much
better and cooler, and I am quite comfortable. I am very glad I did not
go down.'

Her great staring child tenderly embraced her; and having smoothed her
hair, and bathed her forehead and eyes with cold water (offices in which
her awkward hands became skilful), hugged her again, exulted in her
brighter looks, and stationed her in her chair by the window. Over
against this chair, Maggy, with apoplectic exertions that were not
at all required, dragged the box which was her seat on story-telling
occasions, sat down upon it, hugged her own knees, and said, with a
voracious appetite for stories, and with widely-opened eyes:

'Now, Little Mother, let's have a good 'un!'

'What shall it be about, Maggy?'

'Oh, let's have a princess,' said Maggy, 'and let her be a reg'lar one.
Beyond all belief, you know!'

Little Dorrit considered for a moment; and with a rather sad smile upon
her face, which was flushed by the sunset, began:

'Maggy, there was once upon a time a fine King, and he had everything he
could wish for, and a great deal more. He had gold and silver, diamonds
and rubies, riches of every kind. He had palaces, and he had--'

'Hospitals,' interposed Maggy, still nursing her knees. 'Let him have
hospitals, because they're so comfortable. Hospitals with lots of
Chicking.'

'Yes, he had plenty of them, and he had plenty of everything.'

'Plenty of baked potatoes, for instance?' said Maggy.

'Plenty of everything.'

'Lor!' chuckled Maggy, giving her knees a hug. 'Wasn't it prime!'

'This King had a daughter, who was the wisest and most beautiful
Princess that ever was seen. When she was a child she understood all her
lessons before her masters taught them to her; and when she was grown
up, she was the wonder of the world. Now, near the Palace where this
Princess lived, there was a cottage in which there was a poor little
tiny woman, who lived all alone by herself.'

'An old woman,' said Maggy, with an unctuous smack of her lips.

'No, not an old woman. Quite a young one.'

'I wonder she warn't afraid,' said Maggy. 'Go on, please.'

'The Princess passed the cottage nearly every day, and whenever she went
by in her beautiful carriage, she saw the poor tiny woman spinning at
her wheel, and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked
at her. So, one day she stopped the coachman a little way from the
cottage, and got out and walked on and peeped in at the door, and there,
as usual, was the tiny woman spinning at her wheel, and she looked at
the Princess, and the Princess looked at her.'

'Like trying to stare one another out,' said Maggy. 'Please go on,
Little Mother.'

'The Princess was such a wonderful Princess that she had the power of
knowing secrets, and she said to the tiny woman, Why do you keep it
there? This showed her directly that the Princess knew why she lived
all alone by herself spinning at her wheel, and she kneeled down at
the Princess's feet, and asked her never to betray her. So the Princess
said, I never will betray you. Let me see it. So the tiny woman closed
the shutter of the cottage window and fastened the door, and trembling
from head to foot for fear that any one should suspect her, opened a
very secret place and showed the Princess a shadow.'

'Lor!' said Maggy.

'It was the shadow of Some one who had gone by long before: of Some one
who had gone on far away quite out of reach, never, never to come back.
It was bright to look at; and when the tiny woman showed it to the
Princess, she was proud of it with all her heart, as a great, great
treasure. When the Princess had considered it a little while, she said
to the tiny woman, And you keep watch over this every day? And she cast
down her eyes, and whispered, Yes. Then the Princess said, Remind me
why. To which the other replied, that no one so good and kind had ever
passed that way, and that was why in the beginning. She said, too, that
nobody missed it, that nobody was the worse for it, that Some one had
gone on, to those who were expecting him--'

'Some one was a man then?' interposed Maggy.

Little Dorrit timidly said Yes, she believed so; and resumed:

'--Had gone on to those who were expecting him, and that this
remembrance was stolen or kept back from nobody. The Princess made
answer, Ah! But when the cottager died it would be discovered there. The
tiny woman told her No; when that time came, it would sink quietly into
her own grave, and would never be found.'

'Well, to be sure!' said Maggy. 'Go on, please.'

'The Princess was very much astonished to hear this, as you may suppose,
Maggy.'

('And well she might be,' said Maggy.)

'So she resolved to watch the tiny woman, and see what came of it. Every
day she drove in her beautiful carriage by the cottage-door, and there
she saw the tiny woman always alone by herself spinning at her wheel,
and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked at her. At
last one day the wheel was still, and the tiny woman was not to be seen.
When the Princess made inquiries why the wheel had stopped, and where
the tiny woman was, she was informed that the wheel had stopped because
there was nobody to turn it, the tiny woman being dead.'

('They ought to have took her to the Hospital,' said Maggy, and then
she'd have got over it.')

'The Princess, after crying a very little for the loss of the tiny
woman, dried her eyes and got out of her carriage at the place where
she had stopped it before, and went to the cottage and peeped in at the
door. There was nobody to look at her now, and nobody for her to look
at, so she went in at once to search for the treasured shadow. But there
was no sign of it to be found anywhere; and then she knew that the tiny
woman had told her the truth, and that it would never give anybody any
trouble, and that it had sunk quietly into her own grave, and that she
and it were at rest together.

'That's all, Maggy.'

The sunset flush was so bright on Little Dorrit's face when she came
thus to the end of her story, that she interposed her hand to shade it.

'Had she got to be old?' Maggy asked.

'The tiny woman?'

'Ah!'

'I don't know,' said Little Dorrit. 'But it would have been just the
same if she had been ever so old.'

'Would it raly!' said Maggy. 'Well, I suppose it would though.' And sat
staring and ruminating.

She sat so long with her eyes wide open, that at length Little Dorrit,
to entice her from her box, rose and looked out of window. As she
glanced down into the yard, she saw Pancks come in and leer up with the
corner of his eye as he went by.

'Who's he, Little Mother?' said Maggy. She had joined her at the window
and was leaning on her shoulder. 'I see him come in and out often.'

'I have heard him called a fortune-teller,' said Little Dorrit. 'But I
doubt if he could tell many people even their past or present fortunes.'

'Couldn't have told the Princess hers?' said Maggy.

Little Dorrit, looking musingly down into the dark valley of the prison,
shook her head.

'Nor the tiny woman hers?' said Maggy.

'No,' said Little Dorrit, with the sunset very bright upon her. 'But let
us come away from the window.'




CHAPTER 25. Conspirators and Others


The private residence of Mr Pancks was in Pentonville, where he lodged
on the second-floor of a professional gentleman in an extremely small
way, who had an inner-door within the street door, poised on a spring
and starting open with a click like a trap; and who wrote up in the
fan-light, RUGG, GENERAL AGENT, ACCOUNTANT, DEBTS RECOVERED.

This scroll, majestic in its severe simplicity, illuminated a little
slip of front garden abutting on the thirsty high-road, where a few
of the dustiest of leaves hung their dismal heads and led a life of
choking. A professor of writing occupied the first-floor, and enlivened
the garden railings with glass-cases containing choice examples of what
his pupils had been before six lessons and while the whole of his young
family shook the table, and what they had become after six lessons
when the young family was under restraint. The tenancy of Mr Pancks was
limited to one airy bedroom; he covenanting and agreeing with Mr Rugg
his landlord, that in consideration of a certain scale of payments
accurately defined, and on certain verbal notice duly given, he should
be at liberty to elect to share the Sunday breakfast, dinner, tea, or
supper, or each or any or all of those repasts or meals of Mr and Miss
Rugg (his daughter) in the back-parlour.

Miss Rugg was a lady of a little property which she had acquired,
together with much distinction in the neighbourhood, by having her
heart severely lacerated and her feelings mangled by a middle-aged baker
resident in the vicinity, against whom she had, by the agency of Mr
Rugg, found it necessary to proceed at law to recover damages for a
breach of promise of marriage. The baker having been, by the counsel for
Miss Rugg, witheringly denounced on that occasion up to the full amount
of twenty guineas, at the rate of about eighteen-pence an epithet, and
having been cast in corresponding damages, still suffered occasional
persecution from the youth of Pentonville. But Miss Rugg, environed by
the majesty of the law, and having her damages invested in the public
securities, was regarded with consideration.

In the society of Mr Rugg, who had a round white visage, as if all his
blushes had been drawn out of him long ago, and who had a ragged yellow
head like a worn-out hearth broom; and in the society of Miss Rugg, who
had little nankeen spots, like shirt buttons, all over her face, and
whose own yellow tresses were rather scrubby than luxuriant; Mr Pancks
had usually dined on Sundays for some few years, and had twice a week,
or so, enjoyed an evening collation of bread, Dutch cheese, and porter.
Mr Pancks was one of the very few marriageable men for whom Miss Rugg
had no terrors, the argument with which he reassured himself being
twofold; that is to say, firstly, 'that it wouldn't do twice,' and
secondly, 'that he wasn't worth it.' Fortified within this double
armour, Mr Pancks snorted at Miss Rugg on easy terms.

Up to this time, Mr Pancks had transacted little or no business at his
quarters in Pentonville, except in the sleeping line; but now that he
had become a fortune-teller, he was often closeted after midnight
with Mr Rugg in his little front-parlour office, and even after those
untimely hours, burnt tallow in his bed-room. Though his duties as his
proprietor's grubber were in no wise lessened; and though that service
bore no greater resemblance to a bed of roses than was to be discovered
in its many thorns; some new branch of industry made a constant demand
upon him. When he cast off the Patriarch at night, it was only to take
an anonymous craft in tow, and labour away afresh in other waters.

The advance from a personal acquaintance with the elder Mr Chivery to
an introduction to his amiable wife and disconsolate son, may have been
easy; but easy or not, Mr Pancks soon made it. He nestled in the bosom
of the tobacco business within a week or two after his first appearance
in the College, and particularly addressed himself to the cultivation of
a good understanding with Young John. In this endeavour he so prospered
as to lure that pining shepherd forth from the groves, and tempt him
to undertake mysterious missions; on which he began to disappear at
uncertain intervals for as long a space as two or three days together.
The prudent Mrs Chivery, who wondered greatly at this change, would have
protested against it as detrimental to the Highland typification on the
doorpost but for two forcible reasons; one, that her John was roused to
take strong interest in the business which these starts were supposed
to advance--and this she held to be good for his drooping spirits;
the other, that Mr Pancks confidentially agreed to pay her, for the
occupation of her son's time, at the handsome rate of seven and sixpence
per day. The proposal originated with himself, and was couched in the
pithy terms, 'If your John is weak enough, ma'am, not to take it,
that is no reason why you should be, don't you see? So, quite between
ourselves, ma'am, business being business, here it is!'

What Mr Chivery thought of these things, or how much or how little he
knew about them, was never gathered from himself. It has been already
remarked that he was a man of few words; and it may be here observed
that he had imbibed a professional habit of locking everything up. He
locked himself up as carefully as he locked up the Marshalsea debtors.
Even his custom of bolting his meals may have been a part of an uniform
whole; but there is no question, that, as to all other purposes, he kept
his mouth as he kept the Marshalsea door. He never opened it without
occasion. When it was necessary to let anything out, he opened it a
little way, held it open just as long as sufficed for the purpose, and
locked it again. Even as he would be sparing of his trouble at the
Marshalsea door, and would keep a visitor who wanted to go out, waiting
for a few moments if he saw another visitor coming down the yard, so
that one turn of the key should suffice for both, similarly he would
often reserve a remark if he perceived another on its way to his lips,
and would deliver himself of the two together. As to any key to his
inner knowledge being to be found in his face, the Marshalsea key was as
legible as an index to the individual characters and histories upon
which it was turned.

That Mr Pancks should be moved to invite any one to dinner at
Pentonville, was an unprecedented fact in his calendar. But he invited
Young John to dinner, and even brought him within range of the dangerous
(because expensive) fascinations of Miss Rugg. The banquet was appointed
for a Sunday, and Miss Rugg with her own hands stuffed a leg of mutton
with oysters on the occasion, and sent it to the baker's--not _the_
baker's but an opposition establishment. Provision of oranges, apples,
and nuts was also made. And rum was brought home by Mr Pancks on
Saturday night, to gladden the visitor's heart.

The store of creature comforts was not the chief part of the visitor's
reception. Its special feature was a foregone family confidence and
sympathy. When Young John appeared at half-past one without the ivory
hand and waistcoat of golden sprigs, the sun shorn of his beams by
disastrous clouds, Mr Pancks presented him to the yellow-haired Ruggs as
the young man he had so often mentioned who loved Miss Dorrit.

'I am glad,' said Mr Rugg, challenging him specially in that character,
'to have the distinguished gratification of making your acquaintance,
sir. Your feelings do you honour. You are young; may you never outlive
your feelings! If I was to outlive my own feelings, sir,' said Mr Rugg,
who was a man of many words, and was considered to possess a remarkably
good address; 'if I was to outlive my own feelings, I'd leave fifty
pound in my will to the man who would put me out of existence.'

Miss Rugg heaved a sigh.

'My daughter, sir,' said Mr Rugg. 'Anastatia, you are no stranger to the
state of this young man's affections. My daughter has had her trials,
sir'--Mr Rugg might have used the word more pointedly in the singular
number--'and she can feel for you.'

Young John, almost overwhelmed by the touching nature of this greeting,
professed himself to that effect.

'What I envy you, sir, is,' said Mr Rugg, 'allow me to take your hat--we
are rather short of pegs--I'll put it in the corner, nobody will tread
on it there--What I envy you, sir, is the luxury of your own feelings. I
belong to a profession in which that luxury is sometimes denied us.'

Young John replied, with acknowledgments, that he only hoped he did what
was right, and what showed how entirely he was devoted to Miss Dorrit.
He wished to be unselfish; and he hoped he was. He wished to do anything
as laid in his power to serve Miss Dorrit, altogether putting himself
out of sight; and he hoped he did. It was but little that he could do,
but he hoped he did it.

'Sir,' said Mr Rugg, taking him by the hand, 'you are a young man that
it does one good to come across. You are a young man that I should
like to put in the witness-box, to humanise the minds of the legal
profession. I hope you have brought your appetite with you, and intend
to play a good knife and fork?'

'Thank you, sir,' returned Young John, 'I don't eat much at present.'

Mr Rugg drew him a little apart. 'My daughter's case, sir,' said he, 'at
the time when, in vindication of her outraged feelings and her sex, she
became the plaintiff in Rugg and Bawkins. I suppose I could have put it
in evidence, Mr Chivery, if I had thought it worth my while, that the
amount of solid sustenance my daughter consumed at that period did not
exceed ten ounces per week.'

'I think I go a little beyond that, sir,' returned the other,
hesitating, as if he confessed it with some shame.

'But in your case there's no fiend in human form,' said Mr Rugg, with
argumentative smile and action of hand. 'Observe, Mr Chivery!
No fiend in human form!'

'No, sir, certainly,' Young John added with simplicity, 'I should be
very sorry if there was.'

'The sentiment,' said Mr Rugg, 'is what I should have expected from your
known principles. It would affect my daughter greatly, sir, if she heard
it. As I perceive the mutton, I am glad she didn't hear it. Mr Pancks,
on this occasion, pray face me. My dear, face Mr Chivery. For what we
are going to receive, may we (and Miss Dorrit) be truly thankful!'

But for a grave waggishness in Mr Rugg's manner of delivering this
introduction to the feast, it might have appeared that Miss Dorrit was
expected to be one of the company. Pancks recognised the sally in
his usual way, and took in his provender in his usual way. Miss Rugg,
perhaps making up some of her arrears, likewise took very kindly to
the mutton, and it rapidly diminished to the bone. A bread-and-butter
pudding entirely disappeared, and a considerable amount of cheese and
radishes vanished by the same means. Then came the dessert.

Then also, and before the broaching of the rum and water, came Mr
Pancks's note-book. The ensuing business proceedings were brief but
curious, and rather in the nature of a conspiracy. Mr Pancks looked over
his note-book, which was now getting full, studiously; and picked out
little extracts, which he wrote on separate slips of paper on the table;
Mr Rugg, in the meanwhile, looking at him with close attention, and
Young John losing his uncollected eye in mists of meditation. When Mr
Pancks, who supported the character of chief conspirator, had completed
his extracts, he looked them over, corrected them, put up his note-book,
and held them like a hand at cards.

'Now, there's a churchyard in Bedfordshire,' said Pancks. 'Who takes
it?'

'I'll take it, sir,' returned Mr Rugg, 'if no one bids.'

Mr Pancks dealt him his card, and looked at his hand again.

'Now, there's an Enquiry in York,' said Pancks. 'Who takes it?'

'I'm not good for York,' said Mr Rugg.

'Then perhaps,' pursued Pancks, 'you'll be so obliging, John Chivery?'

Young John assenting, Pancks dealt him his card, and consulted his hand
again.

'There's a Church in London; I may as well take that. And a Family
Bible; I may as well take that, too. That's two to me. Two to me,'
repeated Pancks, breathing hard over his cards. 'Here's a Clerk at
Durham for you, John, and an old seafaring gentleman at Dunstable for
you, Mr Rugg. Two to me, was it? Yes, two to me. Here's a Stone; three
to me. And a Still-born Baby; four to me. And all, for the present,
told.'

When he had thus disposed of his cards, all being done very quietly and
in a suppressed tone, Mr Pancks puffed his way into his own
breast-pocket and tugged out a canvas bag; from which, with a sparing
hand, he told forth money for travelling expenses in two little
portions. 'Cash goes out fast,' he said anxiously, as he pushed a
portion to each of his male companions, 'very fast.'

'I can only assure you, Mr Pancks,' said Young John, 'that I deeply
regret my circumstances being such that I can't afford to pay my own
charges, or that it's not advisable to allow me the time necessary for
my doing the distances on foot; because nothing would give me greater
satisfaction than to walk myself off my legs without fee or reward.'

This young man's disinterestedness appeared so very ludicrous in
the eyes of Miss Rugg, that she was obliged to effect a precipitate
retirement from the company, and to sit upon the stairs until she had
had her laugh out. Meanwhile Mr Pancks, looking, not without some pity,
at Young John, slowly and thoughtfully twisted up his canvas bag as if
he were wringing its neck. The lady, returning as he restored it to his
pocket, mixed rum and water for the party, not forgetting her fair self,
and handed to every one his glass. When all were supplied, Mr Rugg rose,
and silently holding out his glass at arm's length above the centre of
the table, by that gesture invited the other three to add theirs, and to
unite in a general conspiratorial clink. The ceremony was effective up
to a certain point, and would have been wholly so throughout, if Miss
Rugg, as she raised her glass to her lips in completion of it, had not
happened to look at Young John; when she was again so overcome by the
contemptible comicality of his disinterestedness as to splutter some
ambrosial drops of rum and water around, and withdraw in confusion.

Such was the dinner without precedent, given by Pancks at Pentonville;
and such was the busy and strange life Pancks led. The only waking
moments at which he appeared to relax from his cares, and to recreate
himself by going anywhere or saying anything without a pervading object,
were when he showed a dawning interest in the lame foreigner with the
stick, down Bleeding Heart Yard.

The foreigner, by name John Baptist Cavalletto--they called him Mr
Baptist in the Yard--was such a chirping, easy, hopeful little fellow,
that his attraction for Pancks was probably in the force of contrast.
Solitary, weak, and scantily acquainted with the most necessary words
of the only language in which he could communicate with the people about
him, he went with the stream of his fortunes, in a brisk way that was
new in those parts. With little to eat, and less to drink, and nothing
to wear but what he wore upon him, or had brought tied up in one of the
smallest bundles that ever were seen, he put as bright a face upon it as
if he were in the most flourishing circumstances when he first hobbled
up and down the Yard, humbly propitiating the general good-will with his
white teeth.

It was uphill work for a foreigner, lame or sound, to make his way with
the Bleeding Hearts. In the first place, they were vaguely persuaded
that every foreigner had a knife about him; in the second, they held it
to be a sound constitutional national axiom that he ought to go home to
his own country. They never thought of inquiring how many of their own
countrymen would be returned upon their hands from divers parts of the
world, if the principle were generally recognised; they considered it
particularly and peculiarly British. In the third place, they had a
notion that it was a sort of Divine visitation upon a foreigner that he
was not an Englishman, and that all kinds of calamities happened to
his country because it did things that England did not, and did not do
things that England did. In this belief, to be sure, they had long been
carefully trained by the Barnacles and Stiltstalkings, who were always
proclaiming to them, officially, that no country which failed to submit
itself to those two large families could possibly hope to be under the
protection of Providence; and who, when they believed it, disparaged
them in private as the most prejudiced people under the sun.

This, therefore, might be called a political position of the Bleeding
Hearts; but they entertained other objections to having foreigners
in the Yard. They believed that foreigners were always badly off; and
though they were as ill off themselves as they could desire to be,
that did not diminish the force of the objection. They believed that
foreigners were dragooned and bayoneted; and though they certainly got
their own skulls promptly fractured if they showed any ill-humour, still
it was with a blunt instrument, and that didn't count. They believed
that foreigners were always immoral; and though they had an occasional
assize at home, and now and then a divorce case or so, that had nothing
to do with it. They believed that foreigners had no independent spirit,
as never being escorted to the poll in droves by Lord Decimus Tite
Barnacle, with colours flying and the tune of Rule Britannia playing.
Not to be tedious, they had many other beliefs of a similar kind.

Against these obstacles, the lame foreigner with the stick had to make
head as well as he could; not absolutely single-handed, because Mr
Arthur Clennam had recommended him to the Plornishes (he lived at the
top of the same house), but still at heavy odds. However, the Bleeding
Hearts were kind hearts; and when they saw the little fellow cheerily
limping about with a good-humoured face, doing no harm, drawing no
knives, committing no outrageous immoralities, living chiefly on
farinaceous and milk diet, and playing with Mrs Plornish's children of
an evening, they began to think that although he could never hope to be
an Englishman, still it would be hard to visit that affliction on his
head. They began to accommodate themselves to his level, calling him 'Mr
Baptist,' but treating him like a baby, and laughing immoderately at his
lively gestures and his childish English--more, because he didn't mind
it, and laughed too. They spoke to him in very loud voices as if he
were stone deaf. They constructed sentences, by way of teaching him the
language in its purity, such as were addressed by the savages to Captain
Cook, or by Friday to Robinson Crusoe. Mrs Plornish was particularly
ingenious in this art; and attained so much celebrity for saying 'Me ope
you leg well soon,' that it was considered in the Yard but a very short
remove indeed from speaking Italian. Even Mrs Plornish herself began to
think that she had a natural call towards that language. As he became
more popular, household objects were brought into requisition for his
instruction in a copious vocabulary; and whenever he appeared in the
Yard ladies would fly out at their doors crying 'Mr Baptist--tea-pot!'
'Mr Baptist--dust-pan!' 'Mr Baptist--flour-dredger!' 'Mr
Baptist--coffee-biggin!' At the same time exhibiting those articles,
and penetrating him with a sense of the appalling difficulties of the
Anglo-Saxon tongue.

It was in this stage of his progress, and in about the third week of his
occupation, that Mr Pancks's fancy became attracted by the little man.
Mounting to his attic, attended by Mrs Plornish as interpreter, he found
Mr Baptist with no furniture but his bed on the ground, a table, and a
chair, carving with the aid of a few simple tools, in the blithest way
possible.

'Now, old chap,' said Mr Pancks, 'pay up!'

He had his money ready, folded in a scrap of paper, and laughingly
handed it in; then with a free action, threw out as many fingers of his
right hand as there were shillings, and made a cut crosswise in the air
for an odd sixpence.

'Oh!' said Mr Pancks, watching him, wonderingly. 'That's it, is it?
You're a quick customer. It's all right. I didn't expect to receive it,
though.'

Mrs Plornish here interposed with great condescension, and explained to
Mr Baptist. 'E please. E glad get money.'

The little man smiled and nodded. His bright face seemed uncommonly
attractive to Mr Pancks. 'How's he getting on in his limb?' he asked Mrs
Plornish.

'Oh, he's a deal better, sir,' said Mrs Plornish. 'We expect next week
he'll be able to leave off his stick entirely.' (The opportunity
being too favourable to be lost, Mrs Plornish displayed her great
accomplishment by explaining with pardonable pride to Mr Baptist, 'E ope
you leg well soon.')

'He's a merry fellow, too,' said Mr Pancks, admiring him as if he were a
mechanical toy. 'How does he live?'

'Why, sir,' rejoined Mrs Plornish, 'he turns out to have quite a power
of carving them flowers that you see him at now.' (Mr Baptist, watching
their faces as they spoke, held up his work. Mrs Plornish interpreted in
her Italian manner, on behalf of Mr Pancks, 'E please. Double good!')

'Can he live by that?' asked Mr Pancks.

'He can live on very little, sir, and it is expected as he will be able,
in time, to make a very good living. Mr Clennam got it him to do, and
gives him odd jobs besides in at the Works next door--makes 'em for him,
in short, when he knows he wants 'em.'

'And what does he do with himself, now, when he ain't hard at it?' said
Mr Pancks.

'Why, not much as yet, sir, on accounts I suppose of not being able to
walk much; but he goes about the Yard, and he chats without particular
understanding or being understood, and he plays with the children,
and he sits in the sun--he'll sit down anywhere, as if it was an
arm-chair--and he'll sing, and he'll laugh!'

'Laugh!' echoed Mr Pancks. 'He looks to me as if every tooth in his head
was always laughing.'

'But whenever he gets to the top of the steps at t'other end of the
Yard,' said Mrs Plornish, 'he'll peep out in the curiousest way! So that
some of us thinks he's peeping out towards where his own country is, and
some of us thinks he's looking for somebody he don't want to see, and
some of us don't know what to think.'

Mr Baptist seemed to have a general understanding of what she said; or
perhaps his quickness caught and applied her slight action of peeping.
In any case he closed his eyes and tossed his head with the air of a man
who had sufficient reasons for what he did, and said in his own tongue,
it didn't matter. Altro!

'What's Altro?' said Pancks.

'Hem! It's a sort of a general kind of expression, sir,' said Mrs
Plornish.

'Is it?' said Pancks. 'Why, then Altro to you, old chap. Good afternoon.
Altro!'

Mr Baptist in his vivacious way repeating the word several times, Mr
Pancks in his duller way gave it him back once. From that time it became
a frequent custom with Pancks the gipsy, as he went home jaded at night,
to pass round by Bleeding Heart Yard, go quietly up the stairs, look in
at Mr Baptist's door, and, finding him in his room, to say, 'Hallo, old
chap! Altro!' To which Mr Baptist would reply with innumerable bright
nods and smiles, 'Altro, signore, altro, altro, altro!' After this
highly condensed conversation, Mr Pancks would go his way with an
appearance of being lightened and refreshed.




CHAPTER 26. Nobody's State of Mind


If Arthur Clennam had not arrived at that wise decision firmly to
restrain himself from loving Pet, he would have lived on in a state of
much perplexity, involving difficult struggles with his own heart. Not
the least of these would have been a contention, always waging within
it, between a tendency to dislike Mr Henry Gowan, if not to regard
him with positive repugnance, and a whisper that the inclination was
unworthy. A generous nature is not prone to strong aversions, and is
slow to admit them even dispassionately; but when it finds ill-will
gaining upon it, and can discern between-whiles that its origin is not
dispassionate, such a nature becomes distressed.

Therefore Mr Henry Gowan would have clouded Clennam's mind, and would
have been far oftener present to it than more agreeable persons and
subjects but for the great prudence of his decision aforesaid. As it
was, Mr Gowan seemed transferred to Daniel Doyce's mind; at all events,
it so happened that it usually fell to Mr Doyce's turn, rather than
to Clennam's, to speak of him in the friendly conversations they held
together. These were of frequent occurrence now; as the two partners
shared a portion of a roomy house in one of the grave old-fashioned City
streets, lying not far from the Bank of England, by London Wall.

Mr Doyce had been to Twickenham to pass the day. Clennam had excused
himself. Mr Doyce was just come home. He put in his head at the door of
Clennam's sitting-room to say Good night.

'Come in, come in!' said Clennam.

'I saw you were reading,' returned Doyce, as he entered, 'and thought
you might not care to be disturbed.'

But for the notable resolution he had made, Clennam really might not
have known what he had been reading; really might not have had his eyes
upon the book for an hour past, though it lay open before him. He shut
it up, rather quickly.

'Are they well?' he asked.

'Yes,' said Doyce; 'they are well. They are all well.'

Daniel had an old workmanlike habit of carrying his pocket-handkerchief
in his hat. He took it out and wiped his forehead with it, slowly
repeating, 'They are all well. Miss Minnie looking particularly well, I
thought.'

'Any company at the cottage?'

'No, no company.'

'And how did you get on, you four?' asked Clennam gaily.

'There were five of us,' returned his partner. 'There was
What's-his-name. He was there.'

'Who is he?' said Clennam.

'Mr Henry Gowan.'

'Ah, to be sure!' cried Clennam with unusual vivacity, 'Yes!--I forgot
him.'

'As I mentioned, you may remember,' said Daniel Doyce, 'he is always
there on Sunday.'

'Yes, yes,' returned Clennam; 'I remember now.'

Daniel Doyce, still wiping his forehead, ploddingly repeated. 'Yes. He
was there, he was there. Oh yes, he was there. And his dog. _He_ was
there too.'

'Miss Meagles is quite attached to--the--dog,' observed Clennam.

'Quite so,' assented his partner. 'More attached to the dog than I am to
the man.'

'You mean Mr--?'

'I mean Mr Gowan, most decidedly,' said Daniel Doyce.

There was a gap in the conversation, which Clennam devoted to winding up
his watch.

'Perhaps you are a little hasty in your judgment,' he said. 'Our
judgments--I am supposing a general case--'

'Of course,' said Doyce.

'Are so liable to be influenced by many considerations, which, almost
without our knowing it, are unfair, that it is necessary to keep a guard
upon them. For instance, Mr--'

'Gowan,' quietly said Doyce, upon whom the utterance of the name almost
always devolved.

'Is young and handsome, easy and quick, has talent, and has seen a
good deal of various kinds of life. It might be difficult to give an
unselfish reason for being prepossessed against him.'

'Not difficult for me, I think, Clennam,' returned his partner. 'I see
him bringing present anxiety, and, I fear, future sorrow, into my old
friend's house. I see him wearing deeper lines into my old friend's
face, the nearer he draws to, and the oftener he looks at, the face
of his daughter. In short, I see him with a net about the pretty and
affectionate creature whom he will never make happy.'

'We don't know,' said Clennam, almost in the tone of a man in pain,
'that he will not make her happy.'

'We don't know,' returned his partner, 'that the earth will last another
hundred years, but we think it highly probable.'

'Well, well!' said Clennam, 'we must be hopeful, and we must at least
try to be, if not generous (which, in this case, we have no opportunity
of being), just. We will not disparage this gentleman, because he is
successful in his addresses to the beautiful object of his ambition; and
we will not question her natural right to bestow her love on one whom
she finds worthy of it.'

'Maybe, my friend,' said Doyce. 'Maybe also, that she is too young and
petted, too confiding and inexperienced, to discriminate well.'

'That,' said Clennam, 'would be far beyond our power of correction.'

Daniel Doyce shook his head gravely, and rejoined, 'I fear so.'

'Therefore, in a word,' said Clennam, 'we should make up our minds that
it is not worthy of us to say any ill of Mr Gowan. It would be a poor
thing to gratify a prejudice against him. And I resolve, for my part,
not to depreciate him.'

'I am not quite so sure of myself, and therefore I reserve my privilege
of objecting to him,' returned the other. 'But, if I am not sure of
myself, I am sure of you, Clennam, and I know what an upright man you
are, and how much to be respected. Good night, _my_ friend and partner!'
He shook his hand in saying this, as if there had been something serious
at the bottom of their conversation; and they separated.

By this time they had visited the family on several occasions, and had
always observed that even a passing allusion to Mr Henry Gowan when
he was not among them, brought back the cloud which had obscured Mr
Meagles's sunshine on the morning of the chance encounter at the Ferry.
If Clennam had ever admitted the forbidden passion into his breast,
this period might have been a period of real trial; under the actual
circumstances, doubtless it was nothing--nothing.

Equally, if his heart had given entertainment to that prohibited guest,
his silent fighting of his way through the mental condition of this
period might have been a little meritorious. In the constant effort not
to be betrayed into a new phase of the besetting sin of his experience,
the pursuit of selfish objects by low and small means, and to hold
instead to some high principle of honour and generosity, there might
have been a little merit. In the resolution not even to avoid Mr
Meagles's house, lest, in the selfish sparing of himself, he should
bring any slight distress upon the daughter through making her the cause
of an estrangement which he believed the father would regret, there
might have been a little merit. In the modest truthfulness of always
keeping in view the greater equality of Mr Gowan's years and the greater
attractions of his person and manner, there might have been a little
merit. In doing all this and much more, in a perfectly unaffected way
and with a manful and composed constancy, while the pain within him
(peculiar as his life and history) was very sharp, there might have been
some quiet strength of character. But, after the resolution he had made,
of course he could have no such merits as these; and such a state of
mind was nobody's--nobody's.

Mr Gowan made it no concern of his whether it was nobody's or
somebody's. He preserved his perfect serenity of manner on all
occasions, as if the possibility of Clennam's presuming to have debated
the great question were too distant and ridiculous to be imagined. He
had always an affability to bestow on Clennam and an ease to treat
him with, which might of itself (in the supposititious case of his
not having taken that sagacious course) have been a very uncomfortable
element in his state of mind.

'I quite regret you were not with us yesterday,' said Mr Henry Gowan,
calling on Clennam the next morning. 'We had an agreeable day up the
river there.'

So he had heard, Arthur said.

'From your partner?' returned Henry Gowan. 'What a dear old fellow he
is!'

'I have a great regard for him.'

'By Jove, he is the finest creature!' said Gowan. 'So fresh, so green,
trusts in such wonderful things!'

Here was one of the many little rough points that had a tendency to
grate on Clennam's hearing. He put it aside by merely repeating that he
had a high regard for Mr Doyce.

'He is charming! To see him mooning along to that time of life,
laying down nothing by the way and picking up nothing by the way, is
delightful. It warms a man. So unspoilt, so simple, such a good soul!
Upon my life Mr Clennam, one feels desperately worldly and wicked in
comparison with such an innocent creature. I speak for myself, let me
add, without including you. You are genuine also.'

'Thank you for the compliment,' said Clennam, ill at ease; 'you are too,
I hope?'

'So so,' rejoined the other. 'To be candid with you, tolerably. I am
not a great impostor. Buy one of my pictures, and I assure you,
in confidence, it will not be worth the money. Buy one of another
man's--any great professor who beats me hollow--and the chances are that
the more you give him, the more he'll impose upon you. They all do it.'

'All painters?'

'Painters, writers, patriots, all the rest who have stands in the
market. Give almost any man I know ten pounds, and he will impose upon
you to a corresponding extent; a thousand pounds--to a corresponding
extent; ten thousand pounds--to a corresponding extent. So great the
success, so great the imposition. But what a capital world it is!' cried
Gowan with warm enthusiasm. 'What a jolly, excellent, lovable world it
is!'

'I had rather thought,' said Clennam, 'that the principle you mention
was chiefly acted on by--'

'By the Barnacles?' interrupted Gowan, laughing.

'By the political gentlemen who condescend to keep the Circumlocution
Office.'

'Ah! Don't be hard upon the Barnacles,' said Gowan, laughing afresh,
'they are darling fellows! Even poor little Clarence, the born idiot of
the family, is the most agreeable and most endearing blockhead! And by
Jupiter, with a kind of cleverness in him too that would astonish you!'

'It would. Very much,' said Clennam, drily.

'And after all,' cried Gowan, with that characteristic balancing of his
which reduced everything in the wide world to the same light weight,
'though I can't deny that the Circumlocution Office may ultimately
shipwreck everybody and everything, still, that will probably not be in
our time--and it's a school for gentlemen.'

'It's a very dangerous, unsatisfactory, and expensive school to the
people who pay to keep the pupils there, I am afraid,' said Clennam,
shaking his head.

'Ah! You are a terrible fellow,' returned Gowan, airily. 'I can
understand how you have frightened that little donkey, Clarence, the
most estimable of moon-calves (I really love him) nearly out of his
wits. But enough of him, and of all the rest of them. I want to present
you to my mother, Mr Clennam. Pray do me the favour to give me the
opportunity.'

In nobody's state of mind, there was nothing Clennam would have desired
less, or would have been more at a loss how to avoid.

'My mother lives in a most primitive manner down in that dreary
red-brick dungeon at Hampton Court,' said Gowan. 'If you would make
your own appointment, suggest your own day for permitting me to take
you there to dinner, you would be bored and she would be charmed. Really
that's the state of the case.'

What could Clennam say after this? His retiring character included a
great deal that was simple in the best sense, because unpractised and
unused; and in his simplicity and modesty, he could only say that he was
happy to place himself at Mr Gowan's disposal. Accordingly he said it,
and the day was fixed. And a dreaded day it was on his part, and a very
unwelcome day when it came and they went down to Hampton Court together.

The venerable inhabitants of that venerable pile seemed, in those times,
to be encamped there like a sort of civilised gipsies. There was a
temporary air about their establishments, as if they were going away the
moment they could get anything better; there was also a dissatisfied air
about themselves, as if they took it very ill that they had not already
got something much better. Genteel blinds and makeshifts were more or
less observable as soon as their doors were opened; screens not half
high enough, which made dining-rooms out of arched passages, and warded
off obscure corners where footboys slept at nights with their heads
among the knives and forks; curtains which called upon you to believe
that they didn't hide anything; panes of glass which requested you
not to see them; many objects of various forms, feigning to have no
connection with their guilty secret, a bed; disguised traps in walls,
which were clearly coal-cellars; affectations of no thoroughfares, which
were evidently doors to little kitchens. Mental reservations and artful
mysteries grew out of these things. Callers looking steadily into the
eyes of their receivers, pretended not to smell cooking three feet off;
people, confronting closets accidentally left open, pretended not to see
bottles; visitors with their heads against a partition of thin canvas,
and a page and a young female at high words on the other side, made
believe to be sitting in a primeval silence. There was no end to the
small social accommodation-bills of this nature which the gipsies of
gentility were constantly drawing upon, and accepting for, one another.

Some of these Bohemians were of an irritable temperament, as constantly
soured and vexed by two mental trials: the first, the consciousness
that they had never got enough out of the public; the second, the
consciousness that the public were admitted into the building. Under the
latter great wrong, a few suffered dreadfully--particularly on Sundays,
when they had for some time expected the earth to open and swallow
the public up; but which desirable event had not yet occurred, in
consequence of some reprehensible laxity in the arrangements of the
Universe.

Mrs Gowan's door was attended by a family servant of several years'
standing, who had his own crow to pluck with the public concerning a
situation in the Post-Office which he had been for some time expecting,
and to which he was not yet appointed. He perfectly knew that the public
could never have got him in, but he grimly gratified himself with the
idea that the public kept him out. Under the influence of this injury
(and perhaps of some little straitness and irregularity in the matter
of wages), he had grown neglectful of his person and morose in mind;
and now beholding in Clennam one of the degraded body of his oppressors,
received him with ignominy.

Mrs Gowan, however, received him with condescension. He found her a
courtly old lady, formerly a Beauty, and still sufficiently
well-favoured to have dispensed with the powder on her nose and a
certain impossible bloom under each eye. She was a little lofty with
him; so was another old lady, dark-browed and high-nosed, and who must
have had something real about her or she could not have existed, but it
was certainly not her hair or her teeth or her figure or her complexion;
so was a grey old gentleman of dignified and sullen appearance; both of
whom had come to dinner. But, as they had all been in the British
Embassy way in sundry parts of the earth, and as a British Embassy
cannot better establish a character with the Circumlocution Office than
by treating its compatriots with illimitable contempt (else it would
become like the Embassies of other countries), Clennam felt that on the
whole they let him off lightly.

