say to him as her friend and her father's friend, many years older than
herself; was there any trust she would repose in him, any service she
would ask of him, any little aid to her happiness that she could give
him the lasting gratification of believing it was in his power to
render?

She was going to answer, when she was so touched by some little hidden
sorrow or sympathy--what could it have been?--that she said, bursting
into tears again: 'O Mr Clennam! Good, generous, Mr Clennam, pray tell
me you do not blame me.'

'I blame you?' said Clennam. 'My dearest girl! I blame you? No!'

After clasping both her hands upon his arm, and looking confidentially
up into his face, with some hurried words to the effect that she thanked
him from her heart (as she did, if it be the source of earnestness), she
gradually composed herself, with now and then a word of encouragement
from him, as they walked on slowly and almost silently under the
darkening trees.

'And, now, Minnie Gowan,' at length said Clennam, smiling; 'will you ask
me nothing?'

'Oh! I have very much to ask of you.'

'That's well! I hope so; I am not disappointed.'

'You know how I am loved at home, and how I love home. You can hardly
think it perhaps, dear Mr Clennam,' she spoke with great agitation,
'seeing me going from it of my own free will and choice, but I do so
dearly love it!'

'I am sure of that,' said Clennam. 'Can you suppose I doubt it?'

'No, no. But it is strange, even to me, that loving it so much and
being so much beloved in it, I can bear to cast it away. It seems so
neglectful of it, so unthankful.'

'My dear girl,' said Clennam, 'it is in the natural progress and change
of time. All homes are left so.'

'Yes, I know; but all homes are not left with such a blank in them as
there will be in mine when I am gone. Not that there is any scarcity of
far better and more endearing and more accomplished girls than I am; not
that I am much, but that they have made so much of me!'

Pet's affectionate heart was overcharged, and she sobbed while she
pictured what would happen.

'I know what a change papa will feel at first, and I know that at first
I cannot be to him anything like what I have been these many years.
And it is then, Mr Clennam, then more than at any time, that I beg and
entreat you to remember him, and sometimes to keep him company when you
can spare a little while; and to tell him that you know I was fonder
of him when I left him, than I ever was in all my life. For there is
nobody--he told me so himself when he talked to me this very day--there
is nobody he likes so well as you, or trusts so much.'

A clue to what had passed between the father and daughter dropped like
a heavy stone into the well of Clennam's heart, and swelled the water
to his eyes. He said, cheerily, but not quite so cheerily as he tried to
say, that it should be done--that he gave her his faithful promise.

'If I do not speak of mama,' said Pet, more moved by, and more pretty
in, her innocent grief, than Clennam could trust himself even to
consider--for which reason he counted the trees between them and the
fading light as they slowly diminished in number--'it is because mama
will understand me better in this action, and will feel my loss in a
different way, and will look forward in a different manner. But you know
what a dear, devoted mother she is, and you will remember her too; will
you not?'

Let Minnie trust him, Clennam said, let Minnie trust him to do all she
wished.

'And, dear Mr Clennam,' said Minnie, 'because papa and one whom I need
not name, do not fully appreciate and understand one another yet, as
they will by-and-by; and because it will be the duty, and the pride,
and pleasure of my new life, to draw them to a better knowledge of one
another, and to be a happiness to one another, and to be proud of one
another, and to love one another, both loving me so dearly; oh, as you
are a kind, true man! when I am first separated from home (I am going a
long distance away), try to reconcile papa to him a little more, and use
your great influence to keep him before papa's mind free from
prejudice and in his real form. Will you do this for me, as you are a
noble-hearted friend?'

Poor Pet! Self-deceived, mistaken child! When were such changes
ever made in men's natural relations to one another: when was such
reconcilement of ingrain differences ever effected! It has been tried
many times by other daughters, Minnie; it has never succeeded; nothing
has ever come of it but failure.

So Clennam thought. So he did not say; it was too late. He bound himself
to do all she asked, and she knew full well that he would do it.

They were now at the last tree in the avenue. She stopped, and withdrew
her arm. Speaking to him with her eyes lifted up to his, and with the
hand that had lately rested on his sleeve trembling by touching one of
the roses in his breast as an additional appeal to him, she said:

'Dear Mr Clennam, in my happiness--for I am happy, though you have seen
me crying--I cannot bear to leave any cloud between us. If you have
anything to forgive me (not anything that I have wilfully done, but any
trouble I may have caused you without meaning it, or having it in my
power to help it), forgive me to-night out of your noble heart!'

He stooped to meet the guileless face that met his without shrinking. He
kissed it, and answered, Heaven knew that he had nothing to forgive.
As he stooped to meet the innocent face once again, she whispered,
'Good-bye!' and he repeated it. It was taking leave of all his old
hopes--all nobody's old restless doubts. They came out of the avenue
next moment, arm-in-arm as they had entered it: and the trees seemed to
close up behind them in the darkness, like their own perspective of the
past.

The voices of Mr and Mrs Meagles and Doyce were audible directly,
speaking near the garden gate. Hearing Pet's name among them, Clennam
called out, 'She is here, with me.' There was some little wondering and
laughing until they came up; but as soon as they had all come together,
it ceased, and Pet glided away.

Mr Meagles, Doyce, and Clennam, without speaking, walked up and down
on the brink of the river, in the light of the rising moon, for a few
minutes; and then Doyce lingered behind, and went into the house. Mr
Meagles and Clennam walked up and down together for a few minutes more
without speaking, until at length the former broke silence.

'Arthur,' said he, using that familiar address for the first time in
their communication, 'do you remember my telling you, as we walked up
and down one hot morning, looking over the harbour at Marseilles, that
Pet's baby sister who was dead seemed to Mother and me to have grown as
she had grown, and changed as she had changed?'

'Very well.'

'You remember my saying that our thoughts had never been able to
separate those twin sisters, and that, in our fancy, whatever Pet was,
the other was?'

'Yes, very well.'

'Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, much subdued, 'I carry that fancy further
to-night. I feel to-night, my dear fellow, as if you had loved my dead
child very tenderly, and had lost her when she was like what Pet is
now.'

'Thank you!' murmured Clennam, 'thank you!' And pressed his hand.

'Will you come in?' said Mr Meagles, presently.

'In a little while.'

Mr Meagles fell away, and he was left alone. When he had walked on the
river's brink in the peaceful moonlight for some half an hour, he put
his hand in his breast and tenderly took out the handful of roses.
Perhaps he put them to his heart, perhaps he put them to his lips, but
certainly he bent down on the shore and gently launched them on the
flowing river. Pale and unreal in the moonlight, the river floated them
away.

The lights were bright within doors when he entered, and the faces on
which they shone, his own face not excepted, were soon quietly cheerful.
They talked of many subjects (his partner never had had such a ready
store to draw upon for the beguiling of the time), and so to bed, and to
sleep. While the flowers, pale and unreal in the moonlight, floated away
upon the river; and thus do greater things that once were in our
breasts, and near our hearts, flow from us to the eternal seas.




CHAPTER 29. Mrs Flintwinch goes on Dreaming


The house in the city preserved its heavy dulness through all these
transactions, and the invalid within it turned the same unvarying
round of life. Morning, noon, and night, morning, noon, and night, each
recurring with its accompanying monotony, always the same reluctant
return of the same sequences of machinery, like a dragging piece of
clockwork.

The wheeled chair had its associated remembrances and reveries, one may
suppose, as every place that is made the station of a human being has.
Pictures of demolished streets and altered houses, as they formerly were
when the occupant of the chair was familiar with them, images of people
as they too used to be, with little or no allowance made for the lapse
of time since they were seen; of these, there must have been many in the
long routine of gloomy days. To stop the clock of busy existence at the
hour when we were personally sequestered from it, to suppose mankind
stricken motionless when we were brought to a stand-still, to be unable
to measure the changes beyond our view by any larger standard than
the shrunken one of our own uniform and contracted existence, is the
infirmity of many invalids, and the mental unhealthiness of almost all
recluses.

What scenes and actors the stern woman most reviewed, as she sat
from season to season in her one dark room, none knew but herself. Mr
Flintwinch, with his wry presence brought to bear upon her daily like
some eccentric mechanical force, would perhaps have screwed it out of
her, if there had been less resistance in her; but she was too strong
for him. So far as Mistress Affery was concerned, to regard her
liege-lord and her disabled mistress with a face of blank wonder, to
go about the house after dark with her apron over her head, always to
listen for the strange noises and sometimes to hear them, and never
to emerge from her ghostly, dreamy, sleep-waking state, was occupation
enough for her.

There was a fair stroke of business doing, as Mistress Affery made out,
for her husband had abundant occupation in his little office, and saw
more people than had been used to come there for some years. This might
easily be, the house having been long deserted; but he did receive
letters, and comers, and keep books, and correspond. Moreover, he went
about to other counting-houses, and to wharves, and docks, and to the
Custom House, and to Garraway's Coffee House, and the Jerusalem Coffee
House, and on 'Change; so that he was much in and out. He began, too,
sometimes of an evening, when Mrs Clennam expressed no particular wish
for his society, to resort to a tavern in the neighbourhood to look at
the shipping news and closing prices in the evening paper, and even to
exchange small socialities with mercantile Sea Captains who frequented
that establishment. At some period of every day, he and Mrs Clennam held
a council on matters of business; and it appeared to Affery, who was
always groping about, listening and watching, that the two clever ones
were making money.

The state of mind into which Mr Flintwinch's dazed lady had fallen, had
now begun to be so expressed in all her looks and actions that she was
held in very low account by the two clever ones, as a person, never
of strong intellect, who was becoming foolish. Perhaps because her
appearance was not of a commercial cast, or perhaps because it occurred
to him that his having taken her to wife might expose his judgment to
doubt in the minds of customers, Mr Flintwinch laid his commands upon
her that she should hold her peace on the subject of her conjugal
relations, and should no longer call him Jeremiah out of the domestic
trio. Her frequent forgetfulness of this admonition intensified her
startled manner, since Mr Flintwinch's habit of avenging himself on her
remissness by making springs after her on the staircase, and shaking
her, occasioned her to be always nervously uncertain when she might be
thus waylaid next.

Little Dorrit had finished a long day's work in Mrs Clennam's room, and
was neatly gathering up her shreds and odds and ends before going home.
Mr Pancks, whom Affery had just shown in, was addressing an inquiry to
Mrs Clennam on the subject of her health, coupled with the remark that,
'happening to find himself in that direction,' he had looked in to
inquire, on behalf of his proprietor, how she found herself. Mrs
Clennam, with a deep contraction of her brows, was looking at him.

'Mr Casby knows,' said she, 'that I am not subject to changes. The
change that I await here is the great change.'

'Indeed, ma'am?' returned Mr Pancks, with a wandering eye towards the
figure of the little seamstress on her knee picking threads and fraying
of her work from the carpet. 'You look nicely, ma'am.'

'I bear what I have to bear,' she answered. 'Do you what you have to
do.'

'Thank you, ma'am,' said Mr Pancks, 'such is my endeavour.'

'You are often in this direction, are you not?' asked Mrs Clennam.

'Why, yes, ma'am,' said Pancks, 'rather so lately; I have lately been
round this way a good deal, owing to one thing and another.'

'Beg Mr Casby and his daughter not to trouble themselves, by deputy,
about me. When they wish to see me, they know I am here to see them.
They have no need to trouble themselves to send. You have no need to
trouble yourself to come.'

'Not the least trouble, ma'am,' said Mr Pancks. 'You really are looking
uncommonly nicely, ma'am.'

'Thank you. Good evening.'

The dismissal, and its accompanying finger pointed straight at the door,
was so curt and direct that Mr Pancks did not see his way to prolong his
visit. He stirred up his hair with his sprightliest expression, glanced
at the little figure again, said 'Good evening, ma 'am; don't come down,
Mrs Affery, I know the road to the door,' and steamed out. Mrs Clennam,
her chin resting on her hand, followed him with attentive and darkly
distrustful eyes; and Affery stood looking at her as if she were
spell-bound.

Slowly and thoughtfully, Mrs Clennam's eyes turned from the door by
which Pancks had gone out, to Little Dorrit, rising from the carpet.
With her chin drooping more heavily on her hand, and her eyes vigilant
and lowering, the sick woman sat looking at her until she attracted her
attention. Little Dorrit coloured under such a gaze, and looked down.
Mrs Clennam still sat intent.

'Little Dorrit,' she said, when she at last broke silence, 'what do you
know of that man?'

'I don't know anything of him, ma'am, except that I have seen him about,
and that he has spoken to me.'

'What has he said to you?'

'I don't understand what he has said, he is so strange. But nothing
rough or disagreeable.'

'Why does he come here to see you?'

'I don't know, ma'am,' said Little Dorrit, with perfect frankness.

'You know that he does come here to see you?'

'I have fancied so,' said Little Dorrit. 'But why he should come here or
anywhere for that, ma'am, I can't think.'

Mrs Clennam cast her eyes towards the ground, and with her strong, set
face, as intent upon a subject in her mind as it had lately been upon
the form that seemed to pass out of her view, sat absorbed. Some minutes
elapsed before she came out of this thoughtfulness, and resumed her hard
composure.

Little Dorrit in the meanwhile had been waiting to go, but afraid to
disturb her by moving. She now ventured to leave the spot where she
had been standing since she had risen, and to pass gently round by the
wheeled chair. She stopped at its side to say 'Good night, ma'am.'

Mrs Clennam put out her hand, and laid it on her arm. Little Dorrit,
confused under the touch, stood faltering. Perhaps some momentary
recollection of the story of the Princess may have been in her mind.

'Tell me, Little Dorrit,' said Mrs Clennam, 'have you many friends now?'

'Very few, ma'am. Besides you, only Miss Flora and--one more.'

'Meaning,' said Mrs Clennam, with her unbent finger again pointing to
the door, 'that man?'

'Oh no, ma'am!'

'Some friend of his, perhaps?'

'No ma'am.' Little Dorrit earnestly shook her head. 'Oh no! No one at
all like him, or belonging to him.'

'Well!' said Mrs Clennam, almost smiling. 'It is no affair of mine. I
ask, because I take an interest in you; and because I believe I was your
friend when you had no other who could serve you. Is that so?'

'Yes, ma'am; indeed it is. I have been here many a time when, but for
you and the work you gave me, we should have wanted everything.'

'We,' repeated Mrs Clennam, looking towards the watch, once her dead
husband's, which always lay upon her table. 'Are there many of you?'

'Only father and I, now. I mean, only father and I to keep regularly out
of what we get.'

'Have you undergone many privations? You and your father and who else
there may be of you?' asked Mrs Clennam, speaking deliberately, and
meditatively turning the watch over and over.

'Sometimes it has been rather hard to live,' said Little Dorrit, in her
soft voice, and timid uncomplaining way; 'but I think not harder--as to
that--than many people find it.'

'That's well said!' Mrs Clennam quickly returned. 'That's the truth!
You are a good, thoughtful girl. You are a grateful girl too, or I much
mistake you.'

'It is only natural to be that. There is no merit in being that,' said
Little Dorrit. 'I am indeed.'

Mrs Clennam, with a gentleness of which the dreaming Affery had never
dreamed her to be capable, drew down the face of her little seamstress,
and kissed her on the forehead.

'Now go, Little Dorrit,' said she,'or you will be late, poor child!'

In all the dreams Mistress Affery had been piling up since she first
became devoted to the pursuit, she had dreamed nothing more astonishing
than this. Her head ached with the idea that she would find the other
clever one kissing Little Dorrit next, and then the two clever ones
embracing each other and dissolving into tears of tenderness for all
mankind. The idea quite stunned her, as she attended the light footsteps
down the stairs, that the house door might be safely shut.

On opening it to let Little Dorrit out, she found Mr Pancks, instead
of having gone his way, as in any less wonderful place and among less
wonderful phenomena he might have been reasonably expected to do,
fluttering up and down the court outside the house. The moment he saw
Little Dorrit, he passed her briskly, said with his finger to his nose
(as Mrs Affery distinctly heard), 'Pancks the gipsy, fortune-telling,'
and went away. 'Lord save us, here's a gipsy and a fortune-teller in it
now!' cried Mistress Affery. 'What next!'

She stood at the open door, staggering herself with this enigma, on a
rainy, thundery evening. The clouds were flying fast, and the wind was
coming up in gusts, banging some neighbouring shutters that had broken
loose, twirling the rusty chimney-cowls and weather-cocks, and rushing
round and round a confined adjacent churchyard as if it had a mind to
blow the dead citizens out of their graves. The low thunder, muttering
in all quarters of the sky at once, seemed to threaten vengeance for
this attempted desecration, and to mutter, 'Let them rest! Let them
rest!'

Mistress Affery, whose fear of thunder and lightning was only to
be equalled by her dread of the haunted house with a premature and
preternatural darkness in it, stood undecided whether to go in or not,
until the question was settled for her by the door blowing upon her in
a violent gust of wind and shutting her out. 'What's to be done now,
what's to be done now!' cried Mistress Affery, wringing her hands in
this last uneasy dream of all; 'when she's all alone by herself
inside, and can no more come down to open it than the churchyard dead
themselves!'

In this dilemma, Mistress Affery, with her apron as a hood to keep the
rain off, ran crying up and down the solitary paved enclosure several
times. Why she should then stoop down and look in at the keyhole of the
door as if an eye would open it, it would be difficult to say; but it
is none the less what most people would have done in the same situation,
and it is what she did.

From this posture she started up suddenly, with a half scream, feeling
something on her shoulder. It was the touch of a hand; of a man's hand.

The man was dressed like a traveller, in a foraging cap with fur about
it, and a heap of cloak. He looked like a foreigner. He had a quantity
of hair and moustache--jet black, except at the shaggy ends, where
it had a tinge of red--and a high hook nose. He laughed at Mistress
Affery's start and cry; and as he laughed, his moustache went up under
his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache.

'What's the matter?' he asked in plain English. 'What are you frightened
at?'

'At you,' panted Affery.

'Me, madam?'

'And the dismal evening, and--and everything,' said Affery. 'And here!
The wind has been and blown the door to, and I can't get in.'

'Hah!' said the gentleman, who took that very coolly. 'Indeed! Do you
know such a name as Clennam about here?'

'Lord bless us, I should think I did, I should think I did!' cried
Affery, exasperated into a new wringing of hands by the inquiry.

'Where about here?'

'Where!' cried Affery, goaded into another inspection of the keyhole.
'Where but here in this house? And she's all alone in her room, and lost
the use of her limbs and can't stir to help herself or me, and t'other
clever one's out, and Lord forgive me!' cried Affery, driven into a
frantic dance by these accumulated considerations, 'if I ain't a-going
headlong out of my mind!'

Taking a warmer view of the matter now that it concerned himself, the
gentleman stepped back to glance at the house, and his eye soon rested
on the long narrow window of the little room near the hall-door.

'Where may the lady be who has lost the use of her limbs, madam?' he
inquired, with that peculiar smile which Mistress Affery could not
choose but keep her eyes upon.

'Up there!' said Affery. 'Them two windows.'

'Hah! I am of a fair size, but could not have the honour of presenting
myself in that room without a ladder. Now, madam, frankly--frankness is
a part of my character--shall I open the door for you?'

'Yes, bless you, sir, for a dear creetur, and do it at once,' cried
Affery, 'for she may be a-calling to me at this very present minute, or
may be setting herself a fire and burning herself to death, or there's
no knowing what may be happening to her, and me a-going out of my mind
at thinking of it!'

'Stay, my good madam!' He restrained her impatience with a smooth white
hand. 'Business-hours, I apprehend, are over for the day?'

'Yes, yes, yes,' cried Affery. 'Long ago.'

'Let me make, then, a fair proposal. Fairness is a part of my character.
I am just landed from the packet-boat, as you may see.' He showed her
that his cloak was very wet, and that his boots were saturated with
water; she had previously observed that he was dishevelled and sallow,
as if from a rough voyage, and so chilled that he could not keep his
teeth from chattering. 'I am just landed from the packet-boat, madam,
and have been delayed by the weather: the infernal weather! In
consequence of this, madam, some necessary business that I should
otherwise have transacted here within the regular hours (necessary
business because money-business), still remains to be done. Now, if you
will fetch any authorised neighbouring somebody to do it in return for
my opening the door, I'll open the door. If this arrangement should be
objectionable, I'll--' and with the same smile he made a significant
feint of backing away.

Mistress Affery, heartily glad to effect the proposed compromise, gave
in her willing adhesion to it. The gentleman at once requested her to
do him the favour of holding his cloak, took a short run at the narrow
window, made a leap at the sill, clung his way up the bricks, and in
a moment had his hand at the sash, raising it. His eyes looked so very
sinister, as he put his leg into the room and glanced round at Mistress
Affery, that she thought with a sudden coldness, if he were to go
straight up-stairs to murder the invalid, what could she do to prevent
him?

Happily he had no such purpose; for he reappeared, in a moment, at the
house door. 'Now, my dear madam,' he said, as he took back his cloak and
threw it on, 'if you have the goodness to--what the Devil's that!'

The strangest of sounds. Evidently close at hand from the peculiar
shock it communicated to the air, yet subdued as if it were far off. A
tremble, a rumble, and a fall of some light dry matter.

'What the Devil is it?'

'I don't know what it is, but I've heard the like of it over and over
again,' said Affery, who had caught his arm.

He could hardly be a very brave man, even she thought in her dreamy
start and fright, for his trembling lips had turned colourless. After
listening a few moments, he made light of it.

'Bah! Nothing! Now, my dear madam, I think you spoke of some clever
personage. Will you be so good as to confront me with that genius?' He
held the door in his hand, as though he were quite ready to shut her out
again if she failed.

'Don't you say anything about the door and me, then,' whispered Affery.

'Not a word.'

'And don't you stir from here, or speak if she calls, while I run round
the corner.'

'Madam, I am a statue.'

Affery had so vivid a fear of his going stealthily up-stairs the moment
her back was turned, that after hurrying out of sight, she returned to
the gateway to peep at him. Seeing him still on the threshold, more out
of the house than in it, as if he had no love for darkness and no
desire to probe its mysteries, she flew into the next street, and sent a
message into the tavern to Mr Flintwinch, who came out directly. The
two returning together--the lady in advance, and Mr Flintwinch coming up
briskly behind, animated with the hope of shaking her before she could
get housed--saw the gentleman standing in the same place in the dark,
and heard the strong voice of Mrs Clennam calling from her room, 'Who is
it? What is it? Why does no one answer? Who _is_ that, down there?'




CHAPTER 30. The Word of a Gentleman


When Mr and Mrs Flintwinch panted up to the door of the old house in the
twilight, Jeremiah within a second of Affery, the stranger started back.
'Death of my soul!' he exclaimed. 'Why, how did you get here?'

Mr Flintwinch, to whom these words were spoken, repaid the stranger's
wonder in full. He gazed at him with blank astonishment; he looked over
his own shoulder, as expecting to see some one he had not been aware of
standing behind him; he gazed at the stranger again, speechlessly, at
a loss to know what he meant; he looked to his wife for explanation;
receiving none, he pounced upon her, and shook her with such heartiness
that he shook her cap off her head, saying between his teeth, with grim
raillery, as he did it, 'Affery, my woman, you must have a dose, my
woman! This is some of your tricks! You have been dreaming again,
mistress. What's it about? Who is it? What does it mean! Speak out or be
choked! It's the only choice I'll give you.'

Supposing Mistress Affery to have any power of election at the moment,
her choice was decidedly to be choked; for she answered not a syllable
to this adjuration, but, with her bare head wagging violently backwards
and forwards, resigned herself to her punishment. The stranger, however,
picking up her cap with an air of gallantry, interposed.

'Permit me,' said he, laying his hand on the shoulder of Jeremiah, who
stopped and released his victim. 'Thank you. Excuse me. Husband and
wife I know, from this playfulness. Haha! Always agreeable to see that
relation playfully maintained. Listen! May I suggest that somebody
up-stairs, in the dark, is becoming energetically curious to know what
is going on here?'

This reference to Mrs Clennam's voice reminded Mr Flintwinch to step
into the hall and call up the staircase. 'It's all right, I am here,
Affery is coming with your light.' Then he said to the latter
flustered woman, who was putting her cap on, 'Get out with you, and get
up-stairs!' and then turned to the stranger and said to him, 'Now, sir,
what might you please to want?'

'I am afraid,' said the stranger, 'I must be so troublesome as to
propose a candle.'

'True,' assented Jeremiah. 'I was going to do so. Please to stand where
you are while I get one.'

The visitor was standing in the doorway, but turned a little into the
gloom of the house as Mr Flintwinch turned, and pursued him with his
eyes into the little room, where he groped about for a phosphorus box.
When he found it, it was damp, or otherwise out of order; and match
after match that he struck into it lighted sufficiently to throw a dull
glare about his groping face, and to sprinkle his hands with pale little
spots of fire, but not sufficiently to light the candle. The stranger,
taking advantage of this fitful illumination of his visage, looked
intently and wonderingly at him. Jeremiah, when he at last lighted
the candle, knew he had been doing this, by seeing the last shade of
a lowering watchfulness clear away from his face, as it broke into the
doubtful smile that was a large ingredient in its expression.

'Be so good,' said Jeremiah, closing the house door, and taking a pretty
sharp survey of the smiling visitor in his turn, 'as to step into my
counting-house.--It's all right, I tell you!' petulantly breaking off to
answer the voice up-stairs, still unsatisfied, though Affery was there,
speaking in persuasive tones. 'Don't I tell you it's all right? Preserve
the woman, has she no reason at all in her!'

'Timorous,' remarked the stranger.

'Timorous?' said Mr Flintwinch, turning his head to retort, as he went
before with the candle. 'More courageous than ninety men in a hundred,
sir, let me tell you.'

'Though an invalid?'

'Many years an invalid. Mrs Clennam. The only one of that name left
in the House now. My partner.'

Saying something apologetically as he crossed the hall, to the effect
that at that time of night they were not in the habit of receiving any
one, and were always shut up, Mr Flintwinch led the way into his own
office, which presented a sufficiently business-like appearance. Here he
put the light on his desk, and said to the stranger, with his wryest
twist upon him, 'Your commands.'

'My name is Blandois.'

'Blandois. I don't know it,' said Jeremiah.

'I thought it possible,' resumed the other, 'that you might have been
advised from Paris--'

'We have had no advice from Paris respecting anybody of the name of
Blandois,' said Jeremiah.

'No?'

'No.'

Jeremiah stood in his favourite attitude. The smiling Mr Blandois,
opening his cloak to get his hand to a breast-pocket, paused to say,
with a laugh in his glittering eyes, which it occurred to Mr Flintwinch
were too near together:

'You are so like a friend of mine! Not so identically the same as I
supposed when I really did for the moment take you to be the same in the
dusk--for which I ought to apologise; permit me to do so; a readiness
to confess my errors is, I hope, a part of the frankness of my
character--still, however, uncommonly like.'

'Indeed?' said Jeremiah, perversely. 'But I have not received any letter
of advice from anywhere respecting anybody of the name of Blandois.'

'Just so,' said the stranger.

'_Just_ so,' said Jeremiah.

Mr Blandois, not at all put out by this omission on the part of the
correspondents of the house of Clennam and Co., took his pocket-book
from his breast-pocket, selected a letter from that receptacle, and
handed it to Mr Flintwinch. 'No doubt you are well acquainted with the
writing. Perhaps the letter speaks for itself, and requires no advice.
You are a far more competent judge of such affairs than I am. It is my
misfortune to be, not so much a man of business, as what the world calls
(arbitrarily) a gentleman.'

Mr Flintwinch took the letter, and read, under date of Paris, 'We have
to present to you, on behalf of a highly esteemed correspondent of our
Firm, M. Blandois, of this city,' &c. &c. 'Such facilities as he may
require and such attentions as may lie in your power,' &c. &c. 'Also
have to add that if you will honour M. Blandois' drafts at sight to the
extent of, say Fifty Pounds sterling (50_l_.),' &c. &c.

'Very good, sir,' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Take a chair. To the extent of
anything that our House can do--we are in a retired, old-fashioned,
steady way of business, sir--we shall be happy to render you our best
assistance. I observe, from the date of this, that we could not yet be
advised of it. Probably you came over with the delayed mail that brings
the advice.'

'That I came over with the delayed mail, sir,' returned Mr Blandois,
passing his white hand down his high-hooked nose, 'I know to the cost
of my head and stomach: the detestable and intolerable weather having
racked them both. You see me in the plight in which I came out of the
packet within this half-hour. I ought to have been here hours ago,
and then I should not have to apologise--permit me to apologise--for
presenting myself so unreasonably, and frightening--no, by-the-bye, you
said not frightening; permit me to apologise again--the esteemed lady,
Mrs Clennam, in her invalid chamber above stairs.'

Swagger and an air of authorised condescension do so much, that
Mr Flintwinch had already begun to think this a highly gentlemanly
personage. Not the less unyielding with him on that account, he scraped
his chin and said, what could he have the honour of doing for Mr
Blandois to-night, out of business hours?

'Faith!' returned that gentleman, shrugging his cloaked shoulders,
'I must change, and eat and drink, and be lodged somewhere. Have the
kindness to advise me, a total stranger, where, and money is a matter of
perfect indifference until to-morrow. The nearer the place, the better.
Next door, if that's all.'

Mr Flintwinch was slowly beginning, 'For a gentleman of your habits,
there is not in this immediate neighbourhood any hotel--' when Mr
Blandois took him up.

'So much for my habits! my dear sir,' snapping his fingers. 'A citizen
of the world has no habits. That I am, in my poor way, a gentleman,
by Heaven! I will not deny, but I have no unaccommodating prejudiced
habits. A clean room, a hot dish for dinner, and a bottle of not
absolutely poisonous wine, are all I want tonight. But I want that much
without the trouble of going one unnecessary inch to get it.'

'There is,' said Mr Flintwinch, with more than his usual deliberation,
as he met, for a moment, Mr Blandois' shining eyes, which were restless;
'there is a coffee-house and tavern close here, which, so far, I can
recommend; but there's no style about it.'

'I dispense with style!' said Mr Blandois, waving his hand. 'Do me the
honour to show me the house, and introduce me there (if I am not too
troublesome), and I shall be infinitely obliged.'

Mr Flintwinch, upon this, looked up his hat, and lighted Mr Blandois
across the hall again. As he put the candle on a bracket, where the
dark old panelling almost served as an extinguisher for it, he bethought
himself of going up to tell the invalid that he would not be absent five
minutes.

'Oblige me,' said the visitor, on his saying so, 'by presenting my card
of visit. Do me the favour to add that I shall be happy to wait on Mrs
Clennam, to offer my personal compliments, and to apologise for having
occasioned any agitation in this tranquil corner, if it should suit her
convenience to endure the presence of a stranger for a few minutes,
after he shall have changed his wet clothes and fortified himself with
something to eat and drink.'

Jeremiah made all despatch, and said, on his return, 'She'll be glad
to see you, sir; but, being conscious that her sick room has no
attractions, wishes me to say that she won't hold you to your offer, in
case you should think better of it.'

'To think better of it,' returned the gallant Blandois, 'would be to
slight a lady; to slight a lady would be to be deficient in chivalry
towards the sex; and chivalry towards the sex is a part of my
character!' Thus expressing himself, he threw the draggled skirt of his
cloak over his shoulder, and accompanied Mr Flintwinch to the tavern;
taking up on the road a porter who was waiting with his portmanteau on
the outer side of the gateway.

The house was kept in a homely manner, and the condescension of Mr
Blandois was infinite. It seemed to fill to inconvenience the little bar
in which the widow landlady and her two daughters received him; it was
much too big for the narrow wainscoted room with a bagatelle-board in
it, that was first proposed for his reception; it perfectly swamped the
little private holiday sitting-room of the family, which was finally
given up to him. Here, in dry clothes and scented linen, with sleeked
hair, a great ring on each forefinger and a massive show of watch-chain,
Mr Blandois waiting for his dinner, lolling on a window-seat with his
knees drawn up, looked (for all the difference in the setting of the
jewel) fearfully and wonderfully like a certain Monsieur Rigaud who had
once so waited for his breakfast, lying on the stone ledge of the iron
grating of a cell in a villainous dungeon at Marseilles.

His greed at dinner, too, was closely in keeping with the greed of
Monsieur Rigaud at breakfast. His avaricious manner of collecting all
the eatables about him, and devouring some with his eyes while devouring
others with his jaws, was the same manner. His utter disregard of
other people, as shown in his way of tossing the little womanly toys
of furniture about, flinging favourite cushions under his boots for a
softer rest, and crushing delicate coverings with his big body and his
great black head, had the same brute selfishness at the bottom of it.
The softly moving hands that were so busy among the dishes had the old
wicked facility of the hands that had clung to the bars. And when he
could eat no more, and sat sucking his delicate fingers one by one and
wiping them on a cloth, there wanted nothing but the substitution of
vine-leaves to finish the picture.

On this man, with his moustache going up and his nose coming down in
that most evil of smiles, and with his surface eyes looking as if they
belonged to his dyed hair, and had had their natural power of reflecting
light stopped by some similar process, Nature, always true, and never
working in vain, had set the mark, Beware! It was not her fault, if the
warning were fruitless. She is never to blame in any such instance.

Mr Blandois, having finished his repast and cleaned his fingers, took
a cigar from his pocket, and, lying on the window-seat again, smoked it
out at his leisure, occasionally apostrophising the smoke as it parted
from his thin lips in a thin stream:

'Blandois, you shall turn the tables on society, my little child. Haha!
Holy blue, you have begun well, Blandois! At a pinch, an excellent
master in English or French; a man for the bosom of families! You have
a quick perception, you have humour, you have ease, you have insinuating
manners, you have a good appearance; in effect, you are a gentleman! A
gentleman you shall live, my small boy, and a gentleman you shall die.
You shall win, however the game goes. They shall all confess your merit,
Blandois. You shall subdue the society which has grievously wronged
you, to your own high spirit. Death of my soul! You are high spirited by
right and by nature, my Blandois!'

To such soothing murmurs did this gentleman smoke out his cigar and
drink out his bottle of wine. Both being finished, he shook himself into
a sitting attitude; and with the concluding serious apostrophe, 'Hold,
then! Blandois, you ingenious one, have all your wits about you!' arose
and went back to the house of Clennam and Co.

He was received at the door by Mistress Affery, who, under instructions
from her lord, had lighted up two candles in the hall and a third on the
staircase, and who conducted him to Mrs Clennam's room. Tea was prepared
there, and such little company arrangements had been made as usually
attended the reception of expected visitors. They were slight on the
greatest occasion, never extending beyond the production of the China
tea-service, and the covering of the bed with a sober and sad drapery.
For the rest, there was the bier-like sofa with the block upon it, and
the figure in the widow's dress, as if attired for execution; the fire
topped by the mound of damped ashes; the grate with its second little
mound of ashes; the kettle and the smell of black dye; all as they had
been for fifteen years.

Mr Flintwinch presented the gentleman commended to the consideration of
Clennam and Co. Mrs Clennam, who had the letter lying before her, bent
her head and requested him to sit. They looked very closely at one
another. That was but natural curiosity.

'I thank you, sir, for thinking of a disabled woman like me. Few who
come here on business have any remembrance to bestow on one so removed
from observation. It would be idle to expect that they should have. Out
of sight, out of mind. While I am grateful for the exception, I don't
complain of the rule.'

Mr Blandois, in his most gentlemanly manner, was afraid he had disturbed
her by unhappily presenting himself at such an unconscionable time. For
which he had already offered his best apologies to Mr--he begged
pardon--but by name had not the distinguished honour--

'Mr Flintwinch has been connected with the House many years.'

Mr Blandois was Mr Flintwinch's most obedient humble servant. He
entreated Mr Flintwinch to receive the assurance of his profoundest
consideration.

'My husband being dead,' said Mrs Clennam, 'and my son preferring
another pursuit, our old House has no other representative in these days
than Mr Flintwinch.'

'What do you call yourself?' was the surly demand of that gentleman.
'You have the head of two men.'

'My sex disqualifies me,' she proceeded with merely a slight turn of
her eyes in Jeremiah's direction, 'from taking a responsible part in
the business, even if I had the ability; and therefore Mr Flintwinch
combines my interest with his own, and conducts it. It is not what it
used to be; but some of our old friends (principally the writers of this
letter) have the kindness not to forget us, and we retain the power
of doing what they entrust to us as efficiently as we ever did. This
however is not interesting to you. You are English, sir?'

'Faith, madam, no; I am neither born nor bred in England. In effect, I
am of no country,' said Mr Blandois, stretching out his leg and smiting
it: 'I descend from half-a-dozen countries.'

'You have been much about the world?'

'It is true. By Heaven, madam, I have been here and there and
everywhere!'

'You have no ties, probably. Are not married?'

'Madam,' said Mr Blandois, with an ugly fall of his eyebrows, 'I adore
your sex, but I am not married--never was.'

Mistress Affery, who stood at the table near him, pouring out the tea,
happened in her dreamy state to look at him as he said these words, and
to fancy that she caught an expression in his eyes which attracted her
own eyes so that she could not get them away. The effect of this fancy
was to keep her staring at him with the tea-pot in her hand, not only to
her own great uneasiness, but manifestly to his, too; and, through them
both, to Mrs Clennam's and Mr Flintwinch's. Thus a few ghostly moments
supervened, when they were all confusedly staring without knowing why.

'Affery,' her mistress was the first to say, 'what is the matter with
you?'

'I don't know,' said Mistress Affery, with her disengaged left hand
extended towards the visitor. 'It ain't me. It's him!'

'What does this good woman mean?' cried Mr Blandois, turning white, hot,
and slowly rising with a look of such deadly wrath that it contrasted
surprisingly with the slight force of his words. 'How is it possible to
understand this good creature?'

'It's _not_ possible,' said Mr Flintwinch, screwing himself rapidly
in that direction. 'She don't know what she means. She's an idiot, a
wanderer in her mind. She shall have a dose, she shall have such a dose!
Get along with you, my woman,' he added in her ear, 'get along with you,
while you know you're Affery, and before you're shaken to yeast.'

Mistress Affery, sensible of the danger in which her identity stood,
relinquished the tea-pot as her husband seized it, put her apron over
her head, and in a twinkling vanished. The visitor gradually broke into
a smile, and sat down again.

'You'll excuse her, Mr Blandois,' said Jeremiah, pouring out the tea
himself, 'she's failing and breaking up; that's what she's about. Do you
take sugar, sir?'

'Thank you, no tea for me.--Pardon my observing it, but that's a very
remarkable watch!'

The tea-table was drawn up near the sofa, with a small interval between
it and Mrs Clennam's own particular table. Mr Blandois in his gallantry
had risen to hand that lady her tea (her dish of toast was already
there), and it was in placing the cup conveniently within her reach that
the watch, lying before her as it always did, attracted his attention.
Mrs Clennam looked suddenly up at him.

'May I be permitted? Thank you. A fine old-fashioned watch,' he said,
taking it in his hand. 'Heavy for use, but massive and genuine. I have
a partiality for everything genuine. Such as I am, I am genuine myself.
Hah! A gentleman's watch with two cases in the old fashion. May I remove
it from the outer case? Thank you. Aye? An old silk watch-lining, worked
with beads! I have often seen these among old Dutch people and Belgians.
Quaint things!'

'They are old-fashioned, too,' said Mrs Clennam.

'Very. But this is not so old as the watch, I think?'

'I think not.'

'Extraordinary how they used to complicate these cyphers!' remarked Mr
Blandois, glancing up with his own smile again. 'Now is this D. N. F.?
It might be almost anything.'

'Those are the letters.'

Mr Flintwinch, who had been observantly pausing all this time with a cup
of tea in his hand, and his mouth open ready to swallow the contents,
began to do so: always entirely filling his mouth before he emptied it
at a gulp; and always deliberating again before he refilled it.

'D. N. F. was some tender, lovely, fascinating fair-creature, I make no
doubt,' observed Mr Blandois, as he snapped on the case again. 'I adore
her memory on the assumption. Unfortunately for my peace of mind,
I adore but too readily. It may be a vice, it may be a virtue, but
adoration of female beauty and merit constitutes three parts of my
character, madam.'

Mr Flintwinch had by this time poured himself out another cup of tea,
which he was swallowing in gulps as before, with his eyes directed to
the invalid.

'You may be heart-free here, sir,' she returned to Mr Blandois. 'Those
letters are not intended, I believe, for the initials of any name.'

'Of a motto, perhaps,' said Mr Blandois, casually.

'Of a sentence. They have always stood, I believe, for Do Not Forget!'

'And naturally,' said Mr Blandois, replacing the watch and stepping
backward to his former chair, 'you do _not_ forget.'

Mr Flintwinch, finishing his tea, not only took a longer gulp than he
had taken yet, but made his succeeding pause under new circumstances:
that is to say, with his head thrown back and his cup held still at his
lips, while his eyes were still directed at the invalid. She had that
force of face, and that concentrated air of collecting her firmness or
obstinacy, which represented in her case what would have been gesture
and action in another, as she replied with her deliberate strength of
speech:

'No, sir, I do not forget. To lead a life as monotonous as mine has been
during many years, is not the way to forget. To lead a life of
self-correction is not the way to forget. To be sensible of having (as
we all have, every one of us, all the children of Adam!) offences
to expiate and peace to make, does not justify the desire to forget.
Therefore I have long dismissed it, and I neither forget nor wish to
forget.'

Mr Flintwinch, who had latterly been shaking the sediment at the bottom
of his tea-cup, round and round, here gulped it down, and putting the
cup in the tea-tray, as done with, turned his eyes upon Mr Blandois as
if to ask him what he thought of that?

'All expressed, madam,' said Mr Blandois, with his smoothest bow and his
white hand on his breast, 'by the word "naturally," which I am proud
to have had sufficient apprehension and appreciation (but without
appreciation I could not be Blandois) to employ.'

'Pardon me, sir,' she returned, 'if I doubt the likelihood of a
gentleman of pleasure, and change, and politeness, accustomed to court
and to be courted--'

