visit from this venerable lady, when it was plain she held him in the
utmost abhorrence. He could not but look at her with disconcertment, as
she sat breathing bitterness and scorn, and staring leagues away. Flora,
however, received the remark as if it had been of a most apposite and
agreeable nature; approvingly observing aloud that Mr F.'s Aunt had a
great deal of spirit. Stimulated either by this compliment, or by her
burning indignation, that illustrious woman then added, 'Let him meet
it if he can!' And, with a rigid movement of her stony reticule (an
appendage of great size and of a fossil appearance), indicated that
Clennam was the unfortunate person at whom the challenge was hurled.

'One last remark,' resumed Flora, 'I was going to say I wish to make one
last explanation I wish to offer, Mr F.'s Aunt and myself would not have
intruded on business hours Mr F. having been in business and though the
wine trade still business is equally business call it what you will and
business habits are just the same as witness Mr F. himself who had his
slippers always on the mat at ten minutes before six in the afternoon
and his boots inside the fender at ten minutes before eight in the
morning to the moment in all weathers light or dark--would not therefore
have intruded without a motive which being kindly meant it may be hoped
will be kindly taken Arthur, Mr Clennam far more proper, even Doyce and
Clennam probably more business-like.'

'Pray say nothing in the way of apology,' Arthur entreated. 'You are
always welcome.'

'Very polite of you to say so Arthur--cannot remember Mr Clennam until
the word is out, such is the habit of times for ever fled, and so true
it is that oft in the stilly night ere slumber's chain has bound people,
fond memory brings the light of other days around people--very polite
but more polite than true I am afraid, for to go into the machinery
business without so much as sending a line or a card to papa--I don't
say me though there was a time but that is past and stern reality has
now my gracious never mind--does not look like it you must confess.'

Even Flora's commas seemed to have fled on this occasion; she was so
much more disjointed and voluble than in the preceding interview.

'Though indeed,' she hurried on, 'nothing else is to be expected and why
should it be expected and if it's not to be expected why should it be,
and I am far from blaming you or any one, When your mama and my papa
worried us to death and severed the golden bowl--I mean bond but I dare
say you know what I mean and if you don't you don't lose much and care
just as little I will venture to add--when they severed the golden bond
that bound us and threw us into fits of crying on the sofa nearly choked
at least myself everything was changed and in giving my hand to Mr F. I
know I did so with my eyes open but he was so very unsettled and in such
low spirits that he had distractedly alluded to the river if not oil of
something from the chemist's and I did it for the best.'

'My good Flora, we settled that before. It was all quite right.'

'It's perfectly clear you think so,' returned Flora, 'for you take it
very coolly, if I hadn't known it to be China I should have guessed
myself the Polar regions, dear Mr Clennam you are right however and I
cannot blame you but as to Doyce and Clennam papa's property being about
here we heard it from Pancks and but for him we never should have heard
one word about it I am satisfied.'

'No, no, don't say that.'

'What nonsense not to say it Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--easier and less
trying to me than Mr Clennam--when I know it and you know it too and
can't deny it.'

'But I do deny it, Flora. I should soon have made you a friendly visit.'

'Ah!' said Flora, tossing her head. 'I dare say!' and she gave him
another of the old looks. 'However when Pancks told us I made up my mind
that Mr F.'s Aunt and I would come and call because when papa--which was
before that--happened to mention her name to me and to say that you were
interested in her I said at the moment Good gracious why not have her
here then when there's anything to do instead of putting it out.'

'When you say Her,' observed Clennam, by this time pretty well
bewildered, 'do you mean Mr F.'s--'

'My goodness, Arthur--Doyce and Clennam really easier to me with old
remembrances--who ever heard of Mr F.'s Aunt doing needlework and going
out by the day?'

'Going out by the day! Do you speak of Little Dorrit?'

'Why yes of course,' returned Flora; 'and of all the strangest names I
ever heard the strangest, like a place down in the country with a
turnpike, or a favourite pony or a puppy or a bird or something from a
seed-shop to be put in a garden or a flower-pot and come up speckled.'

'Then, Flora,' said Arthur, with a sudden interest in the conversation,
'Mr Casby was so kind as to mention Little Dorrit to you, was he? What
did he say?'

'Oh you know what papa is,' rejoined Flora, 'and how aggravatingly he
sits looking beautiful and turning his thumbs over and over one another
till he makes one giddy if one keeps one's eyes upon him, he said when
we were talking of you--I don't know who began the subject Arthur (Doyce
and Clennam) but I am sure it wasn't me, at least I hope not but you
really must excuse my confessing more on that point.'

'Certainly,' said Arthur. 'By all means.'

'You are very ready,' pouted Flora, coming to a sudden stop in a
captivating bashfulness, 'that I must admit, Papa said you had spoken of
her in an earnest way and I said what I have told you and that's all.'

'That's all?' said Arthur, a little disappointed.

'Except that when Pancks told us of your having embarked in this
business and with difficulty persuaded us that it was really you I said
to Mr F.'s Aunt then we would come and ask you if it would be agreeable
to all parties that she should be engaged at our house when required
for I know she often goes to your mama's and I know that your mama has
a very touchy temper Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--or I never might have
married Mr F. and might have been at this hour but I am running into
nonsense.'

'It was very kind of you, Flora, to think of this.'

Poor Flora rejoined with a plain sincerity which became her better than
her youngest glances, that she was glad he thought so. She said it with
so much heart that Clennam would have given a great deal to buy his
old character of her on the spot, and throw it and the mermaid away for
ever.

'I think, Flora,' he said, 'that the employment you can give Little
Dorrit, and the kindness you can show her--'

'Yes and I will,' said Flora, quickly.

'I am sure of it--will be a great assistance and support to her. I do
not feel that I have the right to tell you what I know of her, for I
acquired the knowledge confidentially, and under circumstances that
bind me to silence. But I have an interest in the little creature, and
a respect for her that I cannot express to you. Her life has been one
of such trial and devotion, and such quiet goodness, as you can scarcely
imagine. I can hardly think of her, far less speak of her, without
feeling moved. Let that feeling represent what I could tell you, and
commit her to your friendliness with my thanks.'

Once more he put out his hand frankly to poor Flora; once more poor
Flora couldn't accept it frankly, found it worth nothing openly, must
make the old intrigue and mystery of it. As much to her own enjoyment as
to his dismay, she covered it with a corner of her shawl as she took it.
Then, looking towards the glass front of the counting-house, and seeing
two figures approaching, she cried with infinite relish, 'Papa! Hush,
Arthur, for Mercy's sake!' and tottered back to her chair with an
amazing imitation of being in danger of swooning, in the dread surprise
and maidenly flutter of her spirits.

The Patriarch, meanwhile, came inanely beaming towards the
counting-house in the wake of Pancks. Pancks opened the door for him,
towed him in, and retired to his own moorings in a corner.

'I heard from Flora,' said the Patriarch with his benevolent smile,
'that she was coming to call, coming to call. And being out, I thought
I'd come also, thought I'd come also.'

The benign wisdom he infused into this declaration (not of itself
profound), by means of his blue eyes, his shining head, and his long
white hair, was most impressive. It seemed worth putting down among the
noblest sentiments enunciated by the best of men. Also, when he said to
Clennam, seating himself in the proffered chair, 'And you are in a new
business, Mr Clennam? I wish you well, sir, I wish you well!' he seemed
to have done benevolent wonders.

'Mrs Finching has been telling me, sir,' said Arthur, after making his
acknowledgments; the relict of the late Mr F. meanwhile protesting, with
a gesture, against his use of that respectable name; 'that she hopes
occasionally to employ the young needlewoman you recommended to my
mother. For which I have been thanking her.'

The Patriarch turning his head in a lumbering way towards Pancks, that
assistant put up the note-book in which he had been absorbed, and took
him in tow.

'You didn't recommend her, you know,' said Pancks; 'how could you? You
knew nothing about her, you didn't. The name was mentioned to you, and
you passed it on. That's what _you_ did.'

'Well!' said Clennam. 'As she justifies any recommendation, it is much
the same thing.'

'You are glad she turns out well,' said Pancks, 'but it wouldn't have
been your fault if she had turned out ill. The credit's not yours as it
is, and the blame wouldn't have been yours as it might have been. You
gave no guarantee. You knew nothing about her.'

'You are not acquainted, then,' said Arthur, hazarding a random question,
'with any of her family?'

'Acquainted with any of her family?' returned Pancks. 'How should you be
acquainted with any of her family? You never heard of 'em. You can't
be acquainted with people you never heard of, can you? You should think
not!'

All this time the Patriarch sat serenely smiling; nodding or shaking his
head benevolently, as the case required.

'As to being a reference,' said Pancks, 'you know, in a general way,
what being a reference means. It's all your eye, that is! Look at your
tenants down the Yard here. They'd all be references for one another,
if you'd let 'em. What would be the good of letting 'em? It's no
satisfaction to be done by two men instead of one. One's enough. A
person who can't pay, gets another person who can't pay, to guarantee
that he can pay. Like a person with two wooden legs getting another
person with two wooden legs, to guarantee that he has got two natural
legs. It don't make either of them able to do a walking match. And four
wooden legs are more troublesome to you than two, when you don't want
any.' Mr Pancks concluded by blowing off that steam of his.

A momentary silence that ensued was broken by Mr F.'s Aunt, who had been
sitting upright in a cataleptic state since her last public remark. She
now underwent a violent twitch, calculated to produce a startling effect
on the nerves of the uninitiated, and with the deadliest animosity
observed:

'You can't make a head and brains out of a brass knob with nothing in
it. You couldn't do it when your Uncle George was living; much less when
he's dead.'

Mr Pancks was not slow to reply, with his usual calmness, 'Indeed,
ma'am! Bless my soul! I'm surprised to hear it.' Despite his presence of
mind, however, the speech of Mr F.'s Aunt produced a depressing effect
on the little assembly; firstly, because it was impossible to disguise
that Clennam's unoffending head was the particular temple of reason
depreciated; and secondly, because nobody ever knew on these occasions
whose Uncle George was referred to, or what spectral presence might be
invoked under that appellation.

Therefore Flora said, though still not without a certain boastfulness
and triumph in her legacy, that Mr F.'s Aunt was 'very lively to-day,
and she thought they had better go.' But Mr F.'s Aunt proved so lively
as to take the suggestion in unexpected dudgeon and declare that she
would not go; adding, with several injurious expressions, that if
'He'--too evidently meaning Clennam--wanted to get rid of her, 'let
him chuck her out of winder;' and urgently expressing her desire to see
'Him' perform that ceremony.

In this dilemma, Mr Pancks, whose resources appeared equal to any
emergency in the Patriarchal waters, slipped on his hat, slipped out at
the counting-house door, and slipped in again a moment afterwards with
an artificial freshness upon him, as if he had been in the country for
some weeks. 'Why, bless my heart, ma'am!' said Mr Pancks, rubbing up his
hair in great astonishment, 'is that you? How do you _do_, ma'am? You
are looking charming to-day! I am delighted to see you. Favour me with
your arm, ma'am; we'll have a little walk together, you and me, if
you'll honour me with your company.' And so escorted Mr F.'s Aunt down
the private staircase of the counting-house with great gallantry and
success. The patriarchal Mr Casby then rose with the air of having done
it himself, and blandly followed: leaving his daughter, as she followed
in her turn, to remark to her former lover in a distracted whisper
(which she very much enjoyed), that they had drained the cup of life to
the dregs; and further to hint mysteriously that the late Mr F. was at
the bottom of it.

Alone again, Clennam became a prey to his old doubts in reference to his
mother and Little Dorrit, and revolved the old thoughts and suspicions.
They were all in his mind, blending themselves with the duties he was
mechanically discharging, when a shadow on his papers caused him to look
up for the cause. The cause was Mr Pancks. With his hat thrown back upon
his ears as if his wiry prongs of hair had darted up like springs and
cast it off, with his jet-black beads of eyes inquisitively sharp, with
the fingers of his right hand in his mouth that he might bite the nails,
and with the fingers of his left hand in reserve in his pocket for
another course, Mr Pancks cast his shadow through the glass upon the
books and papers.

Mr Pancks asked, with a little inquiring twist of his head, if he
might come in again? Clennam replied with a nod of his head in the
affirmative. Mr Pancks worked his way in, came alongside the desk, made
himself fast by leaning his arms upon it, and started conversation with
a puff and a snort.

'Mr F.'s Aunt is appeased, I hope?' said Clennam.

'All right, sir,' said Pancks.

'I am so unfortunate as to have awakened a strong animosity in the
breast of that lady,' said Clennam. 'Do you know why?'

'Does _she_ know why?' said Pancks.

'I suppose not.'

'_I_ suppose not,' said Pancks.

He took out his note-book, opened it, shut it, dropped it into his hat,
which was beside him on the desk, and looked in at it as it lay at the
bottom of the hat: all with a great appearance of consideration.

'Mr Clennam,' he then began, 'I am in want of information, sir.'

'Connected with this firm?' asked Clennam.

'No,' said Pancks.

'With what then, Mr Pancks? That is to say, assuming that you want it of
me.'

'Yes, sir; yes, I want it of you,' said Pancks, 'if I can persuade you
to furnish it. A, B, C, D. DA, DE, DI, DO. Dictionary order. Dorrit.
That's the name, sir?'

Mr Pancks blew off his peculiar noise again, and fell to at his
right-hand nails. Arthur looked searchingly at him; he returned the
look.

'I don't understand you, Mr Pancks.'

'That's the name that I want to know about.'

'And what do you want to know?'

'Whatever you can and will tell me.' This comprehensive summary of his
desires was not discharged without some heavy labouring on the part of
Mr Pancks's machinery.

'This is a singular visit, Mr Pancks. It strikes me as rather
extraordinary that you should come, with such an object, to me.'

'It may be all extraordinary together,' returned Pancks. 'It may be out
of the ordinary course, and yet be business. In short, it is business. I
am a man of business. What business have I in this present world, except
to stick to business? No business.'

With his former doubt whether this dry hard personage were quite in
earnest, Clennam again turned his eyes attentively upon his face. It
was as scrubby and dingy as ever, and as eager and quick as ever, and he
could see nothing lurking in it that was at all expressive of a latent
mockery that had seemed to strike upon his ear in the voice.

'Now,' said Pancks, 'to put this business on its own footing, it's not
my proprietor's.'

'Do you refer to Mr Casby as your proprietor?'

Pancks nodded. 'My proprietor. Put a case. Say, at my proprietor's I
hear name--name of young person Mr Clennam wants to serve. Say, name
first mentioned to my proprietor by Plornish in the Yard. Say, I go to
Plornish. Say, I ask Plornish as a matter of business for information.
Say, Plornish, though six weeks in arrear to my proprietor, declines.
Say, Mrs Plornish declines. Say, both refer to Mr Clennam. Put the
case.'

'Well?'

'Well, sir,' returned Pancks, 'say, I come to him. Say, here I am.'

With those prongs of hair sticking up all over his head, and his breath
coming and going very hard and short, the busy Pancks fell back a step
(in Tug metaphor, took half a turn astern) as if to show his dingy hull
complete, then forged a-head again, and directed his quick glance by
turns into his hat where his note-book was, and into Clennam's face.

'Mr Pancks, not to trespass on your grounds of mystery, I will be as
plain with you as I can. Let me ask two questions. First--'

'All right!' said Pancks, holding up his dirty forefinger with his
broken nail. 'I see! "What's your motive?"'

'Exactly.'

'Motive,' said Pancks, 'good. Nothing to do with my proprietor; not
stateable at present, ridiculous to state at present; but good.
Desiring to serve young person, name of Dorrit,' said Pancks, with his
forefinger still up as a caution. 'Better admit motive to be good.'

'Secondly, and lastly, what do you want to know?'

Mr Pancks fished up his note-book before the question was put, and
buttoning it with care in an inner breast-pocket, and looking straight
at Clennam all the time, replied with a pause and a puff, 'I want
supplementary information of any sort.'

Clennam could not withhold a smile, as the panting little steam-tug, so
useful to that unwieldy ship, the Casby, waited on and watched him as if
it were seeking an opportunity of running in and rifling him of all he
wanted before he could resist its manoeuvres; though there was that in
Mr Pancks's eagerness, too, which awakened many wondering speculations
in his mind. After a little consideration, he resolved to supply Mr
Pancks with such leading information as it was in his power to impart
him; well knowing that Mr Pancks, if he failed in his present research,
was pretty sure to find other means of getting it.

He, therefore, first requesting Mr Pancks to remember his voluntary
declaration that his proprietor had no part in the disclosure, and that
his own intentions were good (two declarations which that coaly little
gentleman with the greatest ardour repeated), openly told him that as to
the Dorrit lineage or former place of habitation, he had no information
to communicate, and that his knowledge of the family did not extend
beyond the fact that it appeared to be now reduced to five members;
namely, to two brothers, of whom one was single, and one a widower with
three children. The ages of the whole family he made known to Mr Pancks,
as nearly as he could guess at them; and finally he described to him
the position of the Father of the Marshalsea, and the course of time and
events through which he had become invested with that character. To
all this, Mr Pancks, snorting and blowing in a more and more portentous
manner as he became more interested, listened with great attention;
appearing to derive the most agreeable sensations from the painfullest
parts of the narrative, and particularly to be quite charmed by the
account of William Dorrit's long imprisonment.

'In conclusion, Mr Pancks,' said Arthur, 'I have but to say this. I have
reasons beyond a personal regard for speaking as little as I can of the
Dorrit family, particularly at my mother's house' (Mr Pancks nodded),
'and for knowing as much as I can. So devoted a man of business as you
are--eh?'

For Mr Pancks had suddenly made that blowing effort with unusual force.

'It's nothing,' said Pancks.

'So devoted a man of business as yourself has a perfect understanding of
a fair bargain. I wish to make a fair bargain with you, that you shall
enlighten me concerning the Dorrit family when you have it in your
power, as I have enlightened you. It may not give you a very flattering
idea of my business habits, that I failed to make my terms beforehand,'
continued Clennam; 'but I prefer to make them a point of honour. I have
seen so much business done on sharp principles that, to tell you the
truth, Mr Pancks, I am tired of them.'

Mr Pancks laughed. 'It's a bargain, sir,' said he. 'You shall find me
stick to it.'

After that, he stood a little while looking at Clennam, and biting his
ten nails all round; evidently while he fixed in his mind what he had
been told, and went over it carefully, before the means of supplying a
gap in his memory should be no longer at hand. 'It's all right,' he said
at last, 'and now I'll wish you good day, as it's collecting day in the
Yard. By-the-bye, though. A lame foreigner with a stick.'

'Ay, ay. You do take a reference sometimes, I see?' said Clennam.

'When he can pay, sir,' replied Pancks. 'Take all you can get, and
keep back all you can't be forced to give up. That's business. The lame
foreigner with the stick wants a top room down the Yard. Is he good for
it?'

'I am,' said Clennam, 'and I will answer for him.'

'That's enough. What I must have of Bleeding Heart Yard,' said Pancks,
making a note of the case in his book, 'is my bond. I want my bond, you
see. Pay up, or produce your property! That's the watchword down the
Yard. The lame foreigner with the stick represented that you sent him;
but he could represent (as far as that goes) that the Great Mogul sent
him. He has been in the hospital, I believe?'

'Yes. Through having met with an accident. He is only just now
discharged.'

'It's pauperising a man, sir, I have been shown, to let him into a
hospital?' said Pancks. And again blew off that remarkable sound.

'I have been shown so too,' said Clennam, coldly.

Mr Pancks, being by that time quite ready for a start, got under steam
in a moment, and, without any other signal or ceremony, was snorting
down the step-ladder and working into Bleeding Heart Yard, before he
seemed to be well out of the counting-house.

Throughout the remainder of the day, Bleeding Heart Yard was in
consternation, as the grim Pancks cruised in it; haranguing the
inhabitants on their backslidings in respect of payment, demanding his
bond, breathing notices to quit and executions, running down defaulters,
sending a swell of terror on before him, and leaving it in his wake.
Knots of people, impelled by a fatal attraction, lurked outside any
house in which he was known to be, listening for fragments of his
discourses to the inmates; and, when he was rumoured to be coming down
the stairs, often could not disperse so quickly but that he would be
prematurely in among them, demanding their own arrears, and rooting them
to the spot. Throughout the remainder of the day, Mr Pancks's What were
they up to? and What did they mean by it? sounded all over the Yard. Mr
Pancks wouldn't hear of excuses, wouldn't hear of complaints, wouldn't
hear of repairs, wouldn't hear of anything but unconditional money down.
Perspiring and puffing and darting about in eccentric directions, and
becoming hotter and dingier every moment, he lashed the tide of the yard
into a most agitated and turbid state. It had not settled down into calm
water again full two hours after he had been seen fuming away on the
horizon at the top of the steps.

There were several small assemblages of the Bleeding Hearts at the
popular points of meeting in the Yard that night, among whom it was
universally agreed that Mr Pancks was a hard man to have to do with; and
that it was much to be regretted, so it was, that a gentleman like Mr
Casby should put his rents in his hands, and never know him in his true
light. For (said the Bleeding Hearts), if a gentleman with that head of
hair and them eyes took his rents into his own hands, ma'am, there
would be none of this worriting and wearing, and things would be very
different.

At which identical evening hour and minute, the Patriarch--who had
floated serenely through the Yard in the forenoon before the harrying
began, with the express design of getting up this trustfulness in his
shining bumps and silken locks--at which identical hour and minute,
that first-rate humbug of a thousand guns was heavily floundering in the
little Dock of his exhausted Tug at home, and was saying, as he turned
his thumbs:

'A very bad day's work, Pancks, very bad day's work. It seems to me,
sir, and I must insist on making this observation forcibly in justice to
myself, that you ought to have got much more money, much more money.'




CHAPTER 24. Fortune-Telling


Little Dorrit received a call that same evening from Mr Plornish, who,
having intimated that he wished to speak to her privately, in a series
of coughs so very noticeable as to favour the idea that her father, as
regarded her seamstress occupation, was an illustration of the axiom
that there are no such stone-blind men as those who will not see,
obtained an audience with her on the common staircase outside the door.

'There's been a lady at our place to-day, Miss Dorrit,' Plornish
growled, 'and another one along with her as is a old wixen if ever I met
with such. The way she snapped a person's head off, dear me!'

The mild Plornish was at first quite unable to get his mind away from Mr
F.'s Aunt. 'For,' said he, to excuse himself, 'she is, I do assure you,
the winegariest party.'

At length, by a great effort, he detached himself from the subject
sufficiently to observe:

'But she's neither here nor there just at present. The other lady, she's
Mr Casby's daughter; and if Mr Casby an't well off, none better, it an't
through any fault of Pancks. For, as to Pancks, he does, he really does,
he does indeed!'

Mr Plornish, after his usual manner, was a little obscure, but
conscientiously emphatic.

'And what she come to our place for,' he pursued, 'was to leave word
that if Miss Dorrit would step up to that card--which it's Mr Casby's
house that is, and Pancks he has a office at the back, where he really
does, beyond belief--she would be glad for to engage her. She was a old
and a dear friend, she said particular, of Mr Clennam, and hoped for to
prove herself a useful friend to _his_ friend. Them was her words. Wishing
to know whether Miss Dorrit could come to-morrow morning, I said I would
see you, Miss, and inquire, and look round there to-night, to say yes,
or, if you was engaged to-morrow, when?'

'I can go to-morrow, thank you,' said Little Dorrit. 'This is very kind
of you, but you are always kind.'

Mr Plornish, with a modest disavowal of his merits, opened the room door
for her readmission, and followed her in with such an exceedingly bald
pretence of not having been out at all, that her father might
have observed it without being very suspicious. In his affable
unconsciousness, however, he took no heed. Plornish, after a little
conversation, in which he blended his former duty as a Collegian with
his present privilege as a humble outside friend, qualified again by his
low estate as a plasterer, took his leave; making the tour of the prison
before he left, and looking on at a game of skittles with the mixed
feelings of an old inhabitant who had his private reasons for believing
that it might be his destiny to come back again.

Early in the morning, Little Dorrit, leaving Maggy in high domestic
trust, set off for the Patriarchal tent. She went by the Iron Bridge,
though it cost her a penny, and walked more slowly in that part of her
journey than in any other. At five minutes before eight her hand was on
the Patriarchal knocker, which was quite as high as she could reach.

She gave Mrs Finching's card to the young woman who opened the door, and
the young woman told her that 'Miss Flora'--Flora having, on her return
to the parental roof, reinvested herself with the title under which she
had lived there--was not yet out of her bedroom, but she was to please
to walk up into Miss Flora's sitting-room. She walked up into
Miss Flora's sitting-room, as in duty bound, and there found a
breakfast-table comfortably laid for two, with a supplementary tray
upon it laid for one. The young woman, disappearing for a few moments,
returned to say that she was to please to take a chair by the fire,
and to take off her bonnet and make herself at home. But Little Dorrit,
being bashful, and not used to make herself at home on such occasions,
felt at a loss how to do it; so she was still sitting near the door with
her bonnet on, when Flora came in in a hurry half an hour afterwards.

Flora was so sorry to have kept her waiting, and good gracious why did
she sit out there in the cold when she had expected to find her by the
fire reading the paper, and hadn't that heedless girl given her the
message then, and had she really been in her bonnet all this time, and
pray for goodness sake let Flora take it off! Flora taking it off in the
best-natured manner in the world, was so struck with the face disclosed,
that she said, 'Why, what a good little thing you are, my dear!' and
pressed her face between her hands like the gentlest of women.

It was the word and the action of a moment. Little Dorrit had hardly
time to think how kind it was, when Flora dashed at the breakfast-table
full of business, and plunged over head and ears into loquacity.

'Really so sorry that I should happen to be late on this morning of all
mornings because my intention and my wish was to be ready to meet you
when you came in and to say that any one that interested Arthur Clennam
half so much must interest me and that I gave you the heartiest welcome
and was so glad, instead of which they never called me and there I
still am snoring I dare say if the truth was known and if you don't like
either cold fowl or hot boiled ham which many people don't I dare say
besides Jews and theirs are scruples of conscience which we must all
respect though I must say I wish they had them equally strong when they
sell us false articles for real that certainly ain't worth the money I
shall be quite vexed,' said Flora.

Little Dorrit thanked her, and said, shyly, bread-and-butter and tea was
all she usually--

'Oh nonsense my dear child I can never hear of that,' said Flora,
turning on the urn in the most reckless manner, and making herself wink
by splashing hot water into her eyes as she bent down to look into the
teapot. 'You are coming here on the footing of a friend and companion
you know if you will let me take that liberty and I should be ashamed
of myself indeed if you could come here upon any other, besides which
Arthur Clennam spoke in such terms--you are tired my dear.'

'No, ma'am.'

'You turn so pale you have walked too far before breakfast and I dare
say live a great way off and ought to have had a ride,' said Flora,
'dear dear is there anything that would do you good?'

'Indeed I am quite well, ma'am. I thank you again and again, but I am
quite well.'

'Then take your tea at once I beg,' said Flora, 'and this wing of fowl
and bit of ham, don't mind me or wait for me, because I always carry in
this tray myself to Mr F.'s Aunt who breakfasts in bed and a charming
old lady too and very clever, Portrait of Mr F. behind the door and very
like though too much forehead and as to a pillar with a marble pavement
and balustrades and a mountain, I never saw him near it nor not likely
in the wine trade, excellent man but not at all in that way.'

Little Dorrit glanced at the portrait, very imperfectly following the
references to that work of art.

'Mr F. was so devoted to me that he never could bear me out of his
sight,' said Flora, 'though of course I am unable to say how long that
might have lasted if he hadn't been cut short while I was a new broom,
worthy man but not poetical manly prose but not romance.'

Little Dorrit glanced at the portrait again. The artist had given it a
head that would have been, in an intellectual point of view, top-heavy
for Shakespeare.

'Romance, however,' Flora went on, busily arranging Mr F.'s Aunt's
toast, 'as I openly said to Mr F. when he proposed to me and you will be
surprised to hear that he proposed seven times once in a hackney-coach
once in a boat once in a pew once on a donkey at Tunbridge Wells and the
rest on his knees, Romance was fled with the early days of Arthur
Clennam, our parents tore us asunder we became marble and stern reality
usurped the throne, Mr F. said very much to his credit that he was
perfectly aware of it and even preferred that state of things
accordingly the word was spoken the fiat went forth and such is life you
see my dear and yet we do not break but bend, pray make a good breakfast
while I go in with the tray.'

She disappeared, leaving Little Dorrit to ponder over the meaning of her
scattered words. She soon came back again; and at last began to take her
own breakfast, talking all the while.

'You see, my dear,' said Flora, measuring out a spoonful or two of some
brown liquid that smelt like brandy, and putting it into her tea, 'I am
obliged to be careful to follow the directions of my medical man though
the flavour is anything but agreeable being a poor creature and it may
be have never recovered the shock received in youth from too much giving
way to crying in the next room when separated from Arthur, have you
known him long?'

As soon as Little Dorrit comprehended that she had been asked this
question--for which time was necessary, the galloping pace of her new
patroness having left her far behind--she answered that she had known Mr
Clennam ever since his return.

'To be sure you couldn't have known him before unless you had been in
China or had corresponded neither of which is likely,' returned Flora,
'for travelling-people usually get more or less mahogany and you are not
at all so and as to corresponding what about? that's very true unless
tea, so it was at his mother's was it really that you knew him first,
highly sensible and firm but dreadfully severe--ought to be the mother
of the man in the iron mask.'

'Mrs Clennam has been kind to me,' said Little Dorrit.

'Really? I am sure I am glad to hear it because as Arthur's mother it's
naturally pleasant to my feelings to have a better opinion of her than
I had before, though what she thinks of me when I run on as I am certain
to do and she sits glowering at me like Fate in a go-cart--shocking
comparison really--invalid and not her fault--I never know or can
imagine.'

'Shall I find my work anywhere, ma'am?' asked Little Dorrit, looking
timidly about; 'can I get it?'

'You industrious little fairy,' returned Flora, taking, in another cup
of tea, another of the doses prescribed by her medical man, 'there's
not the slightest hurry and it's better that we should begin by being
confidential about our mutual friend--too cold a word for me at least
I don't mean that, very proper expression mutual friend--than become
through mere formalities not you but me like the Spartan boy with the
fox biting him, which I hope you'll excuse my bringing up for of all
the tiresome boys that will go tumbling into every sort of company that
boy's the tiresomest.'

Little Dorrit, her face very pale, sat down again to listen. 'Hadn't I
better work the while?' she asked. 'I can work and attend too. I would
rather, if I may.'

Her earnestness was so expressive of her being uneasy without her work,
that Flora answered, 'Well my dear whatever you like best,' and produced
a basket of white handkerchiefs. Little Dorrit gladly put it by her
side, took out her little pocket-housewife, threaded the needle, and
began to hem.

'What nimble fingers you have,' said Flora, 'but are you sure you are
well?'

'Oh yes, indeed!'

Flora put her feet upon the fender, and settled herself for a thorough
good romantic disclosure. She started off at score, tossing her head,
sighing in the most demonstrative manner, making a great deal of use
of her eyebrows, and occasionally, but not often, glancing at the quiet
face that bent over the work.

'You must know my dear,' said Flora, 'but that I have no doubt you know
already not only because I have already thrown it out in a general way
but because I feel I carry it stamped in burning what's his names
upon my brow that before I was introduced to the late Mr F. I had
been engaged to Arthur Clennam--Mr Clennam in public where reserve is
necessary Arthur here--we were all in all to one another it was the
morning of life it was bliss it was frenzy it was everything else of
that sort in the highest degree, when rent asunder we turned to stone in
which capacity Arthur went to China and I became the statue bride of the
late Mr F.'

Flora, uttering these words in a deep voice, enjoyed herself immensely.

'To paint,' said she, 'the emotions of that morning when all was marble
within and Mr F.'s Aunt followed in a glass-coach which it stands to
reason must have been in shameful repair or it never could have broken
down two streets from the house and Mr F.'s Aunt brought home like the
fifth of November in a rush-bottomed chair I will not attempt,
suffice it to say that the hollow form of breakfast took place in the
dining-room downstairs that papa partaking too freely of pickled salmon
was ill for weeks and that Mr F. and myself went upon a continental
tour to Calais where the people fought for us on the pier until they
separated us though not for ever that was not yet to be.'

The statue bride, hardly pausing for breath, went on, with the greatest
complacency, in a rambling manner sometimes incidental to flesh and
blood.

'I will draw a veil over that dreamy life, Mr F. was in good spirits his
appetite was good he liked the cookery he considered the wine weak but
palatable and all was well, we returned to the immediate neighbourhood
of Number Thirty Little Gosling Street London Docks and settled down,
ere we had yet fully detected the housemaid in selling the feathers
out of the spare bed Gout flying upwards soared with Mr F. to another
sphere.'

His relict, with a glance at his portrait, shook her head and wiped her
eyes.

'I revere the memory of Mr F. as an estimable man and most indulgent
husband, only necessary to mention Asparagus and it appeared or to hint
at any little delicate thing to drink and it came like magic in a pint
bottle it was not ecstasy but it was comfort, I returned to papa's roof
and lived secluded if not happy during some years until one day papa
came smoothly blundering in and said that Arthur Clennam awaited me
below, I went below and found him ask me not what I found him except
that he was still unmarried still unchanged!'

The dark mystery with which Flora now enshrouded herself might have
stopped other fingers than the nimble fingers that worked near her.
They worked on without pause, and the busy head bent over them watching
the stitches.

'Ask me not,' said Flora, 'if I love him still or if he still loves me
or what the end is to be or when, we are surrounded by watchful eyes and
it may be that we are destined to pine asunder it may be never more to
be reunited not a word not a breath not a look to betray us all must
be secret as the tomb wonder not therefore that even if I should seem
comparatively cold to Arthur or Arthur should seem comparatively cold to
me we have fatal reasons it is enough if we understand them hush!'

All of which Flora said with so much headlong vehemence as if she really
believed it. There is not much doubt that when she worked herself into
full mermaid condition, she did actually believe whatever she said in
it.

'Hush!' repeated Flora, 'I have now told you all, confidence is
established between us hush, for Arthur's sake I will always be a friend
to you my dear girl and in Arthur's name you may always rely upon me.'

The nimble fingers laid aside the work, and the little figure rose and
kissed her hand. 'You are very cold,' said Flora, changing to her own
natural kind-hearted manner, and gaining greatly by the change. 'Don't
work to-day. I am sure you are not well I am sure you are not strong.'

'It is only that I feel a little overcome by your kindness, and by Mr
Clennam's kindness in confiding me to one he has known and loved so
long.'

'Well really my dear,' said Flora, who had a decided tendency to be
always honest when she gave herself time to think about it, 'it's as
well to leave that alone now, for I couldn't undertake to say after all,
but it doesn't signify lie down a little!'

'I have always been strong enough to do what I want to do, and I shall
be quite well directly,' returned Little Dorrit, with a faint smile.
'You have overpowered me with gratitude, that's all. If I keep near the
window for a moment I shall be quite myself.'

Flora opened a window, sat her in a chair by it, and considerately
retired to her former place. It was a windy day, and the air stirring
on Little Dorrit's face soon brightened it. In a very few minutes she
returned to her basket of work, and her nimble fingers were as nimble as
ever.

Quietly pursuing her task, she asked Flora if Mr Clennam had told her
where she lived? When Flora replied in the negative, Little Dorrit said
that she understood why he had been so delicate, but that she felt sure
he would approve of her confiding her secret to Flora, and that
she would therefore do so now with Flora's permission. Receiving an
encouraging answer, she condensed the narrative of her life into a few
scanty words about herself and a glowing eulogy upon her father; and
Flora took it all in with a natural tenderness that quite understood it,
and in which there was no incoherence.

When dinner-time came, Flora drew the arm of her new charge through
hers, and led her down-stairs, and presented her to the Patriarch and Mr
Pancks, who were already in the dining-room waiting to begin. (Mr F.'s
Aunt was, for the time, laid up in ordinary in her chamber.) By those
gentlemen she was received according to their characters; the Patriarch
appearing to do her some inestimable service in saying that he was glad
to see her, glad to see her; and Mr Pancks blowing off his favourite
sound as a salute.

In that new presence she would have been bashful enough under any
circumstances, and particularly under Flora's insisting on her
drinking a glass of wine and eating of the best that was there; but her
constraint was greatly increased by Mr Pancks. The demeanour of that
gentleman at first suggested to her mind that he might be a taker of
likenesses, so intently did he look at her, and so frequently did he
glance at the little note-book by his side. Observing that he made no
sketch, however, and that he talked about business only, she began to
have suspicions that he represented some creditor of her father's, the
balance due to whom was noted in that pocket volume. Regarded from this
point of view Mr Pancks's puffings expressed injury and impatience, and
each of his louder snorts became a demand for payment.

But here again she was undeceived by anomalous and incongruous conduct
on the part of Mr Pancks himself. She had left the table half an hour,
and was at work alone. Flora had 'gone to lie down' in the next room,
concurrently with which retirement a smell of something to drink
had broken out in the house. The Patriarch was fast asleep, with his
philanthropic mouth open under a yellow pocket-handkerchief in the
dining-room. At this quiet time, Mr Pancks softly appeared before her,
urbanely nodding.

'Find it a little dull, Miss Dorrit?' inquired Pancks in a low voice.

'No, thank you, sir,' said Little Dorrit.

'Busy, I see,' observed Mr Pancks, stealing into the room by inches.
'What are those now, Miss Dorrit?'

'Handkerchiefs.'

'Are they, though!' said Pancks. 'I shouldn't have thought it.' Not in
the least looking at them, but looking at Little Dorrit. 'Perhaps you
wonder who I am. Shall I tell you? I am a fortune-teller.'

Little Dorrit now began to think he was mad.

'I belong body and soul to my proprietor,' said Pancks; 'you saw my
proprietor having his dinner below. But I do a little in the other way,
sometimes; privately, very privately, Miss Dorrit.'

Little Dorrit looked at him doubtfully, and not without alarm. 'I wish
you'd show me the palm of your hand,' said Pancks. 'I should like to
have a look at it. Don't let me be troublesome.'

He was so far troublesome that he was not at all wanted there, but she
laid her work in her lap for a moment, and held out her left hand with
her thimble on it.

'Years of toil, eh?' said Pancks, softly, touching it with his blunt
forefinger. 'But what else are we made for? Nothing. Hallo!' looking
into the lines. 'What's this with bars? It's a College! And what's this
with a grey gown and a black velvet cap? it's a father! And what's this
with a clarionet? It's an uncle! And what's this in dancing-shoes? It's
a sister! And what's this straggling about in an idle sort of a way?
It's a brother! And what's this thinking for 'em all? Why, this is you,
Miss Dorrit!'

Her eyes met his as she looked up wonderingly into his face, and she
thought that although his were sharp eyes, he was a brighter and
gentler-looking man than she had supposed at dinner. His eyes were on
her hand again directly, and her opportunity of confirming or correcting
the impression was gone.

'Now, the deuce is in it,' muttered Pancks, tracing out a line in her
hand with his clumsy finger, 'if this isn't me in the corner here! What
do I want here? What's behind me?'

He carried his finger slowly down to the wrist, and round the wrist, and
affected to look at the back of the hand for what was behind him.

'Is it any harm?' asked Little Dorrit, smiling.

'Deuce a bit!' said Pancks. 'What do you think it's worth?'

'I ought to ask you that. I am not the fortune-teller.'

'True,' said Pancks. 'What's it worth? You shall live to see, Miss
Dorrit.'

Releasing the hand by slow degrees, he drew all his fingers through his
prongs of hair, so that they stood up in their most portentous manner;
and repeated slowly, 'Remember what I say, Miss Dorrit. You shall live
to see.'

She could not help showing that she was much surprised, if it were only
by his knowing so much about her.

'Ah! That's it!' said Pancks, pointing at her. 'Miss Dorrit, not that,
ever!'

More surprised than before, and a little more frightened, she looked to
him for an explanation of his last words.

'Not that,' said Pancks, making, with great seriousness, an imitation
of a surprised look and manner that appeared to be unintentionally
grotesque. 'Don't do that. Never on seeing me, no matter when, no matter
where. I am nobody. Don't take on to mind me. Don't mention me. Take no
notice. Will you agree, Miss Dorrit?'

'I hardly know what to say,' returned Little Dorrit, quite astounded.
'Why?'

'Because I am a fortune-teller. Pancks the gipsy. I haven't told you so
much of your fortune yet, Miss Dorrit, as to tell you what's behind
me on that little hand. I have told you you shall live to see. Is it
agreed, Miss Dorrit?'

'Agreed that I--am--to--'

'To take no notice of me away from here, unless I take on first. Not
to mind me when I come and go. It's very easy. I am no loss, I am not
handsome, I am not good company, I am only my proprietors grubber.
You need do no more than think, "Ah! Pancks the gipsy at his
fortune-telling--he'll tell the rest of my fortune one day--I shall live
to know it." Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?'

'Ye-es,' faltered Little Dorrit, whom he greatly confused, 'I suppose
so, while you do no harm.'

'Good!' Mr Pancks glanced at the wall of the adjoining room, and stooped
forward. 'Honest creature, woman of capital points, but heedless and
a loose talker, Miss Dorrit.' With that he rubbed his hands as if the
interview had been very satisfactory to him, panted away to the door,
and urbanely nodded himself out again.

If Little Dorrit were beyond measure perplexed by this curious conduct
on the part of her new acquaintance, and by finding herself involved
in this singular treaty, her perplexity was not diminished by ensuing
circumstances. Besides that Mr Pancks took every opportunity afforded
him in Mr Casby's house of significantly glancing at her and snorting
at her--which was not much, after what he had done already--he began to
pervade her daily life. She saw him in the street, constantly. When she
went to Mr Casby's, he was always there. When she went to Mrs Clennam's,
he came there on any pretence, as if to keep her in his sight. A week
had not gone by, when she found him to her astonishment in the Lodge one
night, conversing with the turnkey on duty, and to all appearance one
of his familiar companions. Her next surprise was to find him equally at
his ease within the prison; to hear of his presenting himself among
the visitors at her father's Sunday levee; to see him arm in arm with
a Collegiate friend about the yard; to learn, from Fame, that he had
greatly distinguished himself one evening at the social club that held
its meetings in the Snuggery, by addressing a speech to the members
of the institution, singing a song, and treating the company to five
gallons of ale--report madly added a bushel of shrimps. The effect on
Mr Plornish of such of these phenomena as he became an eye-witness of in
his faithful visits, made an impression on Little Dorrit only second to
that produced by the phenomena themselves. They seemed to gag and bind
him. He could only stare, and sometimes weakly mutter that it wouldn't
be believed down Bleeding Heart Yard that this was Pancks; but he never
said a word more, or made a sign more, even to Little Dorrit. Mr Pancks
crowned his mysteries by making himself acquainted with Tip in some
unknown manner, and taking a Sunday saunter into the College on that
gentleman's arm. Throughout he never took any notice of Little Dorrit,
save once or twice when he happened to come close to her and there
was no one very near; on which occasions, he said in passing,
with a friendly look and a puff of encouragement, 'Pancks the
gipsy--fortune-telling.'

Little Dorrit worked and strove as usual, wondering at all this, but
keeping her wonder, as she had from her earliest years kept many heavier
loads, in her own breast. A change had stolen, and was stealing yet,
