
CHAPTER 21. Mr Merdle's Complaint


Upon that establishment of state, the Merdle establishment in Harley
Street, Cavendish Square, there was the shadow of no more common wall
than the fronts of other establishments of state on the opposite side of
the street. Like unexceptionable Society, the opposing rows of houses in
Harley Street were very grim with one another. Indeed, the mansions and
their inhabitants were so much alike in that respect, that the people
were often to be found drawn up on opposite sides of dinner-tables, in
the shade of their own loftiness, staring at the other side of the way
with the dullness of the houses.

Everybody knows how like the street the two dinner-rows of people who
take their stand by the street will be. The expressionless uniform
twenty houses, all to be knocked at and rung at in the same form, all
approachable by the same dull steps, all fended off by the same pattern
of railing, all with the same impracticable fire-escapes, the same
inconvenient fixtures in their heads, and everything without exception
to be taken at a high valuation--who has not dined with these? The
house so drearily out of repair, the occasional bow-window, the stuccoed
house, the newly-fronted house, the corner house with nothing but
angular rooms, the house with the blinds always down, the house with the
hatchment always up, the house where the collector has called for one
quarter of an Idea, and found nobody at home--who has not dined with
these? The house that nobody will take, and is to be had a bargain--who
does not know her? The showy house that was taken for life by the
disappointed gentleman, and which does not suit him at all--who is
unacquainted with that haunted habitation?

Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was more than aware of Mr and Mrs
Merdle. Intruders there were in Harley Street, of whom it was not aware;
but Mr and Mrs Merdle it delighted to honour. Society was aware of
Mr and Mrs Merdle. Society had said 'Let us license them; let us know
them.'

Mr Merdle was immensely rich; a man of prodigious enterprise; a
Midas without the ears, who turned all he touched to gold. He was in
everything good, from banking to building. He was in Parliament, of
course. He was in the City, necessarily. He was Chairman of this,
Trustee of that, President of the other. The weightiest of men had said
to projectors, 'Now, what name have you got? Have you got Merdle?' And,
the reply being in the negative, had said, 'Then I won't look at you.'

This great and fortunate man had provided that extensive bosom which
required so much room to be unfeeling enough in, with a nest of crimson
and gold some fifteen years before. It was not a bosom to repose
upon, but it was a capital bosom to hang jewels upon. Mr Merdle wanted
something to hang jewels upon, and he bought it for the purpose. Storr
and Mortimer might have married on the same speculation.

Like all his other speculations, it was sound and successful. The jewels
showed to the richest advantage. The bosom moving in Society with
the jewels displayed upon it, attracted general admiration. Society
approving, Mr Merdle was satisfied. He was the most disinterested of
men,--did everything for Society, and got as little for himself out of
all his gain and care, as a man might.

That is to say, it may be supposed that he got all he wanted, otherwise
with unlimited wealth he would have got it. But his desire was to the
utmost to satisfy Society (whatever that was), and take up all its
drafts upon him for tribute. He did not shine in company; he had not
very much to say for himself; he was a reserved man, with a broad,
overhanging, watchful head, that particular kind of dull red colour
in his cheeks which is rather stale than fresh, and a somewhat uneasy
expression about his coat-cuffs, as if they were in his confidence, and
had reasons for being anxious to hide his hands. In the little he said,
he was a pleasant man enough; plain, emphatic about public and private
confidence, and tenacious of the utmost deference being shown by every
one, in all things, to Society. In this same Society (if that were it
which came to his dinners, and to Mrs Merdle's receptions and concerts),
he hardly seemed to enjoy himself much, and was mostly to be found
against walls and behind doors. Also when he went out to it, instead of
its coming home to him, he seemed a little fatigued, and upon the
whole rather more disposed for bed; but he was always cultivating it
nevertheless, and always moving in it--and always laying out money on it
with the greatest liberality.

Mrs Merdle's first husband had been a colonel, under whose auspices the
bosom had entered into competition with the snows of North America, and
had come off at little disadvantage in point of whiteness, and at none
in point of coldness. The colonel's son was Mrs Merdle's only child. He
was of a chuckle-headed, high-shouldered make, with a general appearance
of being, not so much a young man as a swelled boy. He had given so few
signs of reason, that a by-word went among his companions that his brain
had been frozen up in a mighty frost which prevailed at St John's, New
Brunswick, at the period of his birth there, and had never thawed from
that hour. Another by-word represented him as having in his infancy,
through the negligence of a nurse, fallen out of a high window on his
head, which had been heard by responsible witnesses to crack. It is
probable that both these representations were of ex post facto
origin; the young gentleman (whose expressive name was Sparkler) being
monomaniacal in offering marriage to all manner of undesirable young
ladies, and in remarking of every successive young lady to whom he
tendered a matrimonial proposal that she was 'a doosed fine gal--well
educated too--with no biggodd nonsense about her.'

A son-in-law with these limited talents, might have been a clog upon
another man; but Mr Merdle did not want a son-in-law for himself; he
wanted a son-in-law for Society. Mr Sparkler having been in the Guards,
and being in the habit of frequenting all the races, and all the
lounges, and all the parties, and being well known, Society was
satisfied with its son-in-law. This happy result Mr Merdle would have
considered well attained, though Mr Sparkler had been a more expensive
article. And he did not get Mr Sparkler by any means cheap for
Society, even as it was.

There was a dinner giving in the Harley Street establishment, while
Little Dorrit was stitching at her father's new shirts by his side that
night; and there were magnates from the Court and magnates from the
City, magnates from the Commons and magnates from the Lords, magnates
from the bench and magnates from the bar, Bishop magnates, Treasury
magnates, Horse Guard magnates, Admiralty magnates,--all the magnates
that keep us going, and sometimes trip us up.

'I am told,' said Bishop magnate to Horse Guards, 'that Mr Merdle has
made another enormous hit. They say a hundred thousand pounds.'

Horse Guards had heard two.

Treasury had heard three.

Bar, handling his persuasive double eye-glass, was by no means clear but
that it might be four. It was one of those happy strokes of calculation
and combination, the result of which it was difficult to estimate. It
was one of those instances of a comprehensive grasp, associated with
habitual luck and characteristic boldness, of which an age presented us
but few. But here was Brother Bellows, who had been in the great Bank
case, and who could probably tell us more. What did Brother Bellows put
this new success at?

Brother Bellows was on his way to make his bow to the bosom, and could
only tell them in passing that he had heard it stated, with great
appearance of truth, as being worth, from first to last, half-a-million
of money.

Admiralty said Mr Merdle was a wonderful man, Treasury said he was a
new power in the country, and would be able to buy up the whole House of
Commons. Bishop said he was glad to think that this wealth flowed into
the coffers of a gentleman who was always disposed to maintain the best
interests of Society.

Mr Merdle himself was usually late on these occasions, as a man still
detained in the clutch of giant enterprises when other men had shaken
off their dwarfs for the day. On this occasion, he was the last arrival.
Treasury said Merdle's work punished him a little. Bishop said he was
glad to think that this wealth flowed into the coffers of a gentleman
who accepted it with meekness.

Powder! There was so much Powder in waiting, that it flavoured the
dinner. Pulverous particles got into the dishes, and Society's meats had
a seasoning of first-rate footmen. Mr Merdle took down a countess who
was secluded somewhere in the core of an immense dress, to which she
was in the proportion of the heart to the overgrown cabbage. If so low a
simile may be admitted, the dress went down the staircase like a richly
brocaded Jack in the Green, and nobody knew what sort of small person
carried it.

Society had everything it could want, and could not want, for dinner.
It had everything to look at, and everything to eat, and everything to
drink. It is to be hoped it enjoyed itself; for Mr Merdle's own share of
the repast might have been paid for with eighteenpence. Mrs Merdle was
magnificent. The chief butler was the next magnificent institution of
the day. He was the stateliest man in the company. He did nothing, but
he looked on as few other men could have done. He was Mr Merdle's
last gift to Society. Mr Merdle didn't want him, and was put out of
countenance when the great creature looked at him; but inappeasable
Society would have him--and had got him.

The invisible countess carried out the Green at the usual stage of
the entertainment, and the file of beauty was closed up by the bosom.
Treasury said, Juno. Bishop said, Judith.

Bar fell into discussion with Horse Guards concerning courts-martial.
Brothers Bellows and Bench struck in. Other magnates paired off. Mr
Merdle sat silent, and looked at the table-cloth. Sometimes a magnate
addressed him, to turn the stream of his own particular discussion
towards him; but Mr Merdle seldom gave much attention to it, or did more
than rouse himself from his calculations and pass the wine.

When they rose, so many of the magnates had something to say to Mr
Merdle individually that he held little levees by the sideboard, and
checked them off as they went out at the door.

Treasury hoped he might venture to congratulate one of England's
world-famed capitalists and merchant-princes (he had turned that
original sentiment in the house a few times, and it came easy to him) on
a new achievement. To extend the triumphs of such men was to extend
the triumphs and resources of the nation; and Treasury felt--he gave Mr
Merdle to understand--patriotic on the subject.

'Thank you, my lord,' said Mr Merdle; 'thank you. I accept your
congratulations with pride, and I am glad you approve.'

'Why, I don't unreservedly approve, my dear Mr Merdle. Because,'
smiling Treasury turned him by the arm towards the sideboard and spoke
banteringly, 'it never can be worth your while to come among us and help
us.'

Mr Merdle felt honoured by the--

'No, no,' said Treasury, 'that is not the light in which one so
distinguished for practical knowledge and great foresight, can be
expected to regard it. If we should ever be happily enabled, by
accidentally possessing the control over circumstances, to propose
to one so eminent to--to come among us, and give us the weight of his
influence, knowledge, and character, we could only propose it to him as
a duty. In fact, as a duty that he owed to Society.'

Mr Merdle intimated that Society was the apple of his eye, and that its
claims were paramount to every other consideration. Treasury moved
on, and Bar came up.

Bar, with his little insinuating jury droop, and fingering his
persuasive double eye-glass, hoped he might be excused if he mentioned
to one of the greatest converters of the root of all evil into the root
of all good, who had for a long time reflected a shining lustre on the
annals even of our commercial country--if he mentioned, disinterestedly,
and as, what we lawyers called in our pedantic way, amicus curiae, a
fact that had come by accident within his knowledge. He had been
required to look over the title of a very considerable estate in one of
the eastern counties--lying, in fact, for Mr Merdle knew we lawyers
loved to be particular, on the borders of two of the eastern counties.
Now, the title was perfectly sound, and the estate was to be purchased
by one who had the command of--Money (jury droop and persuasive
eye-glass), on remarkably advantageous terms. This had come to Bar's
knowledge only that day, and it had occurred to him, 'I shall have the
honour of dining with my esteemed friend Mr Merdle this evening, and,
strictly between ourselves, I will mention the opportunity.' Such a
purchase would involve not only a great legitimate political influence,
but some half-dozen church presentations of considerable annual value.
Now, that Mr Merdle was already at no loss to discover means of
occupying even his capital, and of fully employing even his active and
vigorous intellect, Bar well knew: but he would venture to suggest that
the question arose in his mind, whether one who had deservedly gained so
high a position and so European a reputation did not owe it--we would
not say to himself, but we would say to Society, to possess himself of
such influences as these; and to exercise them--we would not say for his
own, or for his party's, but we would say for Society's--benefit.

Mr Merdle again expressed himself as wholly devoted to that object of
his constant consideration, and Bar took his persuasive eye-glass up the
grand staircase. Bishop then came undesignedly sidling in the direction
of the sideboard.

Surely the goods of this world, it occurred in an accidental way to
Bishop to remark, could scarcely be directed into happier channels than
when they accumulated under the magic touch of the wise and sagacious,
who, while they knew the just value of riches (Bishop tried here to
look as if he were rather poor himself), were aware of their importance,
judiciously governed and rightly distributed, to the welfare of our
brethren at large.

Mr Merdle with humility expressed his conviction that Bishop couldn't
mean him, and with inconsistency expressed his high gratification in
Bishop's good opinion.

Bishop then--jauntily stepping out a little with his well-shaped right
leg, as though he said to Mr Merdle 'don't mind the apron; a mere form!'
put this case to his good friend:

Whether it had occurred to his good friend, that Society might not
unreasonably hope that one so blest in his undertakings, and whose
example on his pedestal was so influential with it, would shed a little
money in the direction of a mission or so to Africa?

Mr Merdle signifying that the idea should have his best attention,
Bishop put another case:

Whether his good friend had at all interested himself in the proceedings
of our Combined Additional Endowed Dignitaries Committee, and whether it
had occurred to him that to shed a little money in _that_ direction might
be a great conception finely executed?

Mr Merdle made a similar reply, and Bishop explained his reason for
inquiring.

Society looked to such men as his good friend to do such things. It was
not that _he_ looked to them, but that Society looked to them.
Just as it was not Our Committee who wanted the Additional Endowed
Dignitaries, but it was Society that was in a state of the most
agonising uneasiness of mind until it got them. He begged to assure his
good friend that he was extremely sensible of his good friend's regard
on all occasions for the best interests of Society; and he considered
that he was at once consulting those interests and expressing the
feeling of Society, when he wished him continued prosperity, continued
increase of riches, and continued things in general.

Bishop then betook himself up-stairs, and the other magnates gradually
floated up after him until there was no one left below but Mr Merdle.
That gentleman, after looking at the table-cloth until the soul of the
chief butler glowed with a noble resentment, went slowly up after the
rest, and became of no account in the stream of people on the grand
staircase. Mrs Merdle was at home, the best of the jewels were hung out
to be seen, Society got what it came for, Mr Merdle drank twopennyworth
of tea in a corner and got more than he wanted.

Among the evening magnates was a famous physician, who knew everybody,
and whom everybody knew. On entering at the door, he came upon Mr Merdle
drinking his tea in a corner, and touched him on the arm.

Mr Merdle started. 'Oh! It's you!'

'Any better to-day?'

'No,' said Mr Merdle, 'I am no better.'

'A pity I didn't see you this morning. Pray come to me to-morrow, or let
me come to you.'

'Well!' he replied. 'I will come to-morrow as I drive by.'

Bar and Bishop had both been bystanders during this short dialogue, and
as Mr Merdle was swept away by the crowd, they made their remarks upon
it to the Physician. Bar said, there was a certain point of mental
strain beyond which no man could go; that the point varied with various
textures of brain and peculiarities of constitution, as he had had
occasion to notice in several of his learned brothers; but the point of
endurance passed by a line's breadth, depression and dyspepsia ensued.
Not to intrude on the sacred mysteries of medicine, he took it, now
(with the jury droop and persuasive eye-glass), that this was Merdle's
case? Bishop said that when he was a young man, and had fallen for a
brief space into the habit of writing sermons on Saturdays, a habit
which all young sons of the church should sedulously avoid, he had
frequently been sensible of a depression, arising as he supposed from an
over-taxed intellect, upon which the yolk of a new-laid egg, beaten up
by the good woman in whose house he at that time lodged, with a glass
of sound sherry, nutmeg, and powdered sugar acted like a charm. Without
presuming to offer so simple a remedy to the consideration of so
profound a professor of the great healing art, he would venture to
inquire whether the strain, being by way of intricate calculations,
the spirits might not (humanly speaking) be restored to their tone by a
gentle and yet generous stimulant?

'Yes,' said the physician, 'yes, you are both right. But I may as well
tell you that I can find nothing the matter with Mr Merdle. He has
the constitution of a rhinoceros, the digestion of an ostrich, and
the concentration of an oyster. As to nerves, Mr Merdle is of a cool
temperament, and not a sensitive man: is about as invulnerable, I should
say, as Achilles. How such a man should suppose himself unwell without
reason, you may think strange. But I have found nothing the matter with
him. He may have some deep-seated recondite complaint. I can't say. I
only say, that at present I have not found it out.'

There was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on the bosom now displaying
precious stones in rivalry with many similar superb jewel-stands; there
was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on young Sparkler hovering about
the rooms, monomaniacally seeking any sufficiently ineligible young lady
with no nonsense about her; there was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint
on the Barnacles and Stiltstalkings, of whom whole colonies were
present; or on any of the company. Even on himself, its shadow was faint
enough as he moved about among the throng, receiving homage.

Mr Merdle's complaint. Society and he had so much to do with one another
in all things else, that it is hard to imagine his complaint, if he
had one, being solely his own affair. Had he that deep-seated recondite
complaint, and did any doctor find it out? Patience, in the meantime,
the shadow of the Marshalsea wall was a real darkening influence, and
could be seen on the Dorrit Family at any stage of the sun's course.




CHAPTER 22. A Puzzle


Mr Clennam did not increase in favour with the Father of the Marshalsea
in the ratio of his increasing visits. His obtuseness on the great
Testimonial question was not calculated to awaken admiration in the
paternal breast, but had rather a tendency to give offence in that
sensitive quarter, and to be regarded as a positive shortcoming in point
of gentlemanly feeling. An impression of disappointment, occasioned
by the discovery that Mr Clennam scarcely possessed that delicacy for
which, in the confidence of his nature, he had been inclined to give
him credit, began to darken the fatherly mind in connection with that
gentleman. The father went so far as to say, in his private family
circle, that he feared Mr Clennam was not a man of high instincts.
He was happy, he observed, in his public capacity as leader and
representative of the College, to receive Mr Clennam when he called to
pay his respects; but he didn't find that he got on with him personally.
There appeared to be something (he didn't know what it was) wanting in
him. Howbeit, the father did not fail in any outward show of politeness,
but, on the contrary, honoured him with much attention; perhaps
cherishing the hope that, although not a man of a sufficiently
brilliant and spontaneous turn of mind to repeat his former testimonial
unsolicited, it might still be within the compass of his nature to
bear the part of a responsive gentleman, in any correspondence that way
tending.

In the threefold capacity, of the gentleman from outside who had been
accidentally locked in on the night of his first appearance, of the
gentleman from outside who had inquired into the affairs of the Father
of the Marshalsea with the stupendous idea of getting him out, and of
the gentleman from outside who took an interest in the child of the
Marshalsea, Clennam soon became a visitor of mark. He was not surprised
by the attentions he received from Mr Chivery when that officer was on
the lock, for he made little distinction between Mr Chivery's politeness
and that of the other turnkeys. It was on one particular afternoon that
Mr Chivery surprised him all at once, and stood forth from his
companions in bold relief.

Mr Chivery, by some artful exercise of his power of clearing the Lodge,
had contrived to rid it of all sauntering Collegians; so that Clennam,
coming out of the prison, should find him on duty alone.

'(Private) I ask your pardon, sir,' said Mr Chivery in a secret manner;
'but which way might you be going?'

'I am going over the Bridge.' He saw in Mr Chivery, with some
astonishment, quite an Allegory of Silence, as he stood with his key on
his lips.

'(Private) I ask your pardon again,' said Mr Chivery, 'but could you go
round by Horsemonger Lane? Could you by any means find time to look in
at that address?' handing him a little card, printed for circulation
among the connection of Chivery and Co., Tobacconists, Importers of pure
Havannah Cigars, Bengal Cheroots, and fine-flavoured Cubas, Dealers in
Fancy Snuffs, &c. &c.

'(Private) It an't tobacco business,' said Mr Chivery. 'The truth is,
it's my wife. She's wishful to say a word to you, sir, upon a point
respecting--yes,' said Mr Chivery, answering Clennam's look of
apprehension with a nod, 'respecting _her_.'

'I will make a point of seeing your wife directly.'

'Thank you, sir. Much obliged. It an't above ten minutes out of your
way. Please to ask for _Mrs_ Chivery!' These instructions, Mr Chivery, who
had already let him out, cautiously called through a little slide in the
outer door, which he could draw back from within for the inspection of
visitors when it pleased him.

Arthur Clennam, with the card in his hand, betook himself to the address
set forth upon it, and speedily arrived there. It was a very small
establishment, wherein a decent woman sat behind the counter working
at her needle. Little jars of tobacco, little boxes of cigars, a
little assortment of pipes, a little jar or two of snuff, and a little
instrument like a shoeing horn for serving it out, composed the retail
stock in trade.

Arthur mentioned his name, and his having promised to call, on the
solicitation of Mr Chivery. About something relating to Miss Dorrit, he
believed. Mrs Chivery at once laid aside her work, rose up from her seat
behind the counter, and deploringly shook her head.

'You may see him now,' said she, 'if you'll condescend to take a peep.'

With these mysterious words, she preceded the visitor into a little
parlour behind the shop, with a little window in it commanding a very
little dull back-yard. In this yard a wash of sheets and table-cloths
tried (in vain, for want of air) to get itself dried on a line or two;
and among those flapping articles was sitting in a chair, like the
last mariner left alive on the deck of a damp ship without the power of
furling the sails, a little woe-begone young man.

'Our John,' said Mrs Chivery.

Not to be deficient in interest, Clennam asked what he might be doing
there?

'It's the only change he takes,' said Mrs Chivery, shaking her head
afresh. 'He won't go out, even in the back-yard, when there's no linen;
but when there's linen to keep the neighbours' eyes off, he'll sit
there, hours. Hours he will. Says he feels as if it was groves!' Mrs
Chivery shook her head again, put her apron in a motherly way to her
eyes, and reconducted her visitor into the regions of the business.

'Please to take a seat, sir,' said Mrs Chivery. 'Miss Dorrit is the
matter with Our John, sir; he's a breaking his heart for her, and I
would wish to take the liberty to ask how it's to be made good to his
parents when bust?'

Mrs Chivery, who was a comfortable-looking woman much respected about
Horsemonger Lane for her feelings and her conversation, uttered this
speech with fell composure, and immediately afterwards began again to
shake her head and dry her eyes.

'Sir,' said she in continuation, 'you are acquainted with the family,
and have interested yourself with the family, and are influential with
the family. If you can promote views calculated to make two young people
happy, let me, for Our John's sake, and for both their sakes, implore
you so to do!'

'I have been so habituated,' returned Arthur, at a loss, 'during
the short time I have known her, to consider Little--I have been so
habituated to consider Miss Dorrit in a light altogether removed from
that in which you present her to me, that you quite take me by surprise.
Does she know your son?'

'Brought up together, sir,' said Mrs Chivery. 'Played together.'

'Does she know your son as her admirer?'

'Oh! bless you, sir,' said Mrs Chivery, with a sort of triumphant
shiver, 'she never could have seen him on a Sunday without knowing he
was that. His cane alone would have told it long ago, if nothing else
had. Young men like John don't take to ivory hands a pinting, for
nothing. How did I first know it myself? Similarly.'

'Perhaps Miss Dorrit may not be so ready as you, you see.'

'Then she knows it, sir,' said Mrs Chivery, 'by word of mouth.'

'Are you sure?'

'Sir,' said Mrs Chivery, 'sure and certain as in this house I am. I see
my son go out with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I see my
son come in with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I know he
done it!' Mrs Chivery derived a surprising force of emphasis from the
foregoing circumstantiality and repetition.

'May I ask you how he came to fall into the desponding state which
causes you so much uneasiness?'

'That,' said Mrs Chivery, 'took place on that same day when to this
house I see that John with these eyes return. Never been himself in this
house since. Never was like what he has been since, not from the hour
when to this house seven year ago me and his father, as tenants by the
quarter, came!' An effect in the nature of an affidavit was gained from
this speech by Mrs Chivery's peculiar power of construction.

'May I venture to inquire what is your version of the matter?'

'You may,' said Mrs Chivery, 'and I will give it to you in honour and in
word as true as in this shop I stand. Our John has every one's good word
and every one's good wish. He played with her as a child when in that
yard a child she played. He has known her ever since. He went out upon
the Sunday afternoon when in this very parlour he had dined, and met
her, with appointment or without appointment; which, I do not pretend to
say. He made his offer to her. Her brother and sister is high in their
views, and against Our John. Her father is all for himself in his views
and against sharing her with any one. Under which circumstances she
has answered Our John, "No, John, I cannot have you, I cannot have
any husband, it is not my intentions ever to become a wife, it is my
intentions to be always a sacrifice, farewell, find another worthy of
you, and forget me!" This is the way in which she is doomed to be a
constant slave to them that are not worthy that a constant slave she
unto them should be. This is the way in which Our John has come to find
no pleasure but in taking cold among the linen, and in showing in that
yard, as in that yard I have myself shown you, a broken-down ruin that
goes home to his mother's heart!' Here the good woman pointed to the
little window, whence her son might be seen sitting disconsolate in
the tuneless groves; and again shook her head and wiped her eyes, and
besought him, for the united sakes of both the young people, to exercise
his influence towards the bright reversal of these dismal events.

She was so confident in her exposition of the case, and it was so
undeniably founded on correct premises in so far as the relative
positions of Little Dorrit and her family were concerned, that Clennam
could not feel positive on the other side. He had come to attach to
Little Dorrit an interest so peculiar--an interest that removed her
from, while it grew out of, the common and coarse things surrounding
her--that he found it disappointing, disagreeable, almost painful, to
suppose her in love with young Mr Chivery in the back-yard, or any such
person. On the other hand, he reasoned with himself that she was just
as good and just as true in love with him, as not in love with him;
and that to make a kind of domesticated fairy of her, on the penalty
of isolation at heart from the only people she knew, would be but a
weakness of his own fancy, and not a kind one. Still, her youthful and
ethereal appearance, her timid manner, the charm of her sensitive voice
and eyes, the very many respects in which she had interested him out
of her own individuality, and the strong difference between herself and
those about her, were not in unison, and were determined not to be in
unison, with this newly presented idea.

He told the worthy Mrs Chivery, after turning these things over in his
mind--he did that, indeed, while she was yet speaking--that he might be
relied upon to do his utmost at all times to promote the happiness of
Miss Dorrit, and to further the wishes of her heart if it were in his
power to do so, and if he could discover what they were. At the same
time he cautioned her against assumptions and appearances; enjoined
strict silence and secrecy, lest Miss Dorrit should be made unhappy; and
particularly advised her to endeavour to win her son's confidence and so
to make quite sure of the state of the case. Mrs Chivery considered the
latter precaution superfluous, but said she would try. She shook her
head as if she had not derived all the comfort she had fondly expected
from this interview, but thanked him nevertheless for the trouble he had
kindly taken. They then parted good friends, and Arthur walked away.

The crowd in the street jostling the crowd in his mind, and the two
crowds making a confusion, he avoided London Bridge, and turned off in
the quieter direction of the Iron Bridge. He had scarcely set foot upon
it, when he saw Little Dorrit walking on before him. It was a pleasant
day, with a light breeze blowing, and she seemed to have that minute
come there for air. He had left her in her father's room within an hour.

It was a timely chance, favourable to his wish of observing her face
and manner when no one else was by. He quickened his pace; but before he
reached her, she turned her head.

'Have I startled you?' he asked.

'I thought I knew the step,' she answered, hesitating.

'And did you know it, Little Dorrit? You could hardly have expected
mine.'

'I did not expect any. But when I heard a step, I thought it--sounded
like yours.'

'Are you going further?'

'No, sir, I am only walking here for a little change.'

They walked together, and she recovered her confiding manner with him,
and looked up in his face as she said, after glancing around:

'It is so strange. Perhaps you can hardly understand it. I sometimes
have a sensation as if it was almost unfeeling to walk here.'

'Unfeeling?'

'To see the river, and so much sky, and so many objects, and such change
and motion. Then to go back, you know, and find him in the same cramped
place.'

'Ah yes! But going back, you must remember that you take with you the
spirit and influence of such things to cheer him.'

'Do I? I hope I may! I am afraid you fancy too much, sir, and make me
out too powerful. If you were in prison, could I bring such comfort to
you?'

'Yes, Little Dorrit, I am sure of it.'

He gathered from a tremor on her lip, and a passing shadow of great
agitation on her face, that her mind was with her father. He remained
silent for a few moments, that she might regain her composure. The
Little Dorrit, trembling on his arm, was less in unison than ever with
Mrs Chivery's theory, and yet was not irreconcilable with a new fancy
which sprung up within him, that there might be some one else in the
hopeless--newer fancy still--in the hopeless unattainable distance.

They turned, and Clennam said, Here was Maggy coming! Little Dorrit
looked up, surprised, and they confronted Maggy, who brought herself
at sight of them to a dead stop. She had been trotting along, so
preoccupied and busy that she had not recognised them until they turned
upon her. She was now in a moment so conscience-stricken that her very
basket partook of the change.

'Maggy, you promised me to stop near father.'

'So I would, Little Mother, only he wouldn't let me. If he takes and
sends me out I must go. If he takes and says, "Maggy, you hurry away and
back with that letter, and you shall have a sixpence if the answer's a
good 'un," I must take it. Lor, Little Mother, what's a poor thing of
ten year old to do? And if Mr Tip--if he happens to be a coming in as
I come out, and if he says "Where are you going, Maggy?" and if I says,
"I'm a going So and So," and if he says, "I'll have a Try too," and if
he goes into the George and writes a letter and if he gives it me and
says, "Take that one to the same place, and if the answer's a good 'un
I'll give you a shilling," it ain't my fault, mother!'

Arthur read, in Little Dorrit's downcast eyes, to whom she foresaw that
the letters were addressed.

'I'm a going So and So. There! That's where I am a going to,' said
Maggy. 'I'm a going So and So. It ain't you, Little Mother, that's got
anything to do with it--it's you, you know,' said Maggy, addressing
Arthur. 'You'd better come, So and So, and let me take and give 'em to
you.'

'We will not be so particular as that, Maggy. Give them me here,' said
Clennam in a low voice.

'Well, then, come across the road,' answered Maggy in a very loud
whisper. 'Little Mother wasn't to know nothing of it, and she would
never have known nothing of it if you had only gone So and So, instead
of bothering and loitering about. It ain't my fault. I must do what I am
told. They ought to be ashamed of themselves for telling me.'

Clennam crossed to the other side, and hurriedly opened the letters.
That from the father mentioned that most unexpectedly finding himself in
the novel position of having been disappointed of a remittance from
the City on which he had confidently counted, he took up his pen, being
restrained by the unhappy circumstance of his incarceration during
three-and-twenty years (doubly underlined), from coming himself, as
he would otherwise certainly have done--took up his pen to entreat Mr
Clennam to advance him the sum of Three Pounds Ten Shillings upon his
I.O.U., which he begged to enclose. That from the son set forth that
Mr Clennam would, he knew, be gratified to hear that he had at
length obtained permanent employment of a highly satisfactory nature,
accompanied with every prospect of complete success in life; but that
the temporary inability of his employer to pay him his arrears of salary
to that date (in which condition said employer had appealed to that
generous forbearance in which he trusted he should never be wanting
towards a fellow-creature), combined with the fraudulent conduct of a
false friend and the present high price of provisions, had reduced
him to the verge of ruin, unless he could by a quarter before six that
evening raise the sum of eight pounds. This sum, Mr Clennam would be
happy to learn, he had, through the promptitude of several friends
who had a lively confidence in his probity, already raised, with the
exception of a trifling balance of one pound seventeen and fourpence;
the loan of which balance, for the period of one month, would be fraught
with the usual beneficent consequences.

These letters Clennam answered with the aid of his pencil and
pocket-book, on the spot; sending the father what he asked for, and
excusing himself from compliance with the demand of the son. He then
commissioned Maggy to return with his replies, and gave her the
shilling of which the failure of her supplemental enterprise would have
disappointed her otherwise.

When he rejoined Little Dorrit, and they had begun walking as before,
she said all at once:

'I think I had better go. I had better go home.'

'Don't be distressed,' said Clennam, 'I have answered the letters. They
were nothing. You know what they were. They were nothing.'

'But I am afraid,' she returned, 'to leave him, I am afraid to leave
any of them. When I am gone, they pervert--but they don't mean it--even
Maggy.'

'It was a very innocent commission that she undertook, poor thing. And
in keeping it secret from you, she supposed, no doubt, that she was only
saving you uneasiness.'

'Yes, I hope so, I hope so. But I had better go home! It was but the
other day that my sister told me I had become so used to the prison that
I had its tone and character. It must be so. I am sure it must be when I
see these things. My place is there. I am better there, it is unfeeling
in me to be here, when I can do the least thing there. Good-bye. I had
far better stay at home!'

The agonised way in which she poured this out, as if it burst of itself
from her suppressed heart, made it difficult for Clennam to keep the
tears from his eyes as he saw and heard her.

'Don't call it home, my child!' he entreated. 'It is always painful to
me to hear you call it home.'

'But it is home! What else can I call home? Why should I ever forget it
for a single moment?'

'You never do, dear Little Dorrit, in any good and true service.'

'I hope not, O I hope not! But it is better for me to stay there; much
better, much more dutiful, much happier. Please don't go with me, let me
go by myself. Good-bye, God bless you. Thank you, thank you.'

He felt that it was better to respect her entreaty, and did not move
while her slight form went quickly away from him. When it had fluttered
out of sight, he turned his face towards the water and stood thinking.

She would have been distressed at any time by this discovery of the
letters; but so much so, and in that unrestrainable way?

No.

When she had seen her father begging with his threadbare disguise on,
when she had entreated him not to give her father money, she had
been distressed, but not like this. Something had made her keenly and
additionally sensitive just now. Now, was there some one in the hopeless
unattainable distance? Or had the suspicion been brought into his mind,
by his own associations of the troubled river running beneath the bridge
with the same river higher up, its changeless tune upon the prow of the
ferry-boat, so many miles an hour the peaceful flowing of the stream,
here the rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet?

He thought of his poor child, Little Dorrit, for a long time there; he
thought of her going home; he thought of her in the night; he thought
of her when the day came round again. And the poor child Little Dorrit
thought of him--too faithfully, ah, too faithfully!--in the shadow of
the Marshalsea wall.




CHAPTER 23. Machinery in Motion


Mr Meagles bestirred himself with such prompt activity in the matter of
the negotiation with Daniel Doyce which Clennam had entrusted to him,
that he soon brought it into business train, and called on Clennam at
nine o'clock one morning to make his report.

'Doyce is highly gratified by your good opinion,' he opened the business
by saying, 'and desires nothing so much as that you should examine the
affairs of the Works for yourself, and entirely understand them. He has
handed me the keys of all his books and papers--here they are jingling
in this pocket--and the only charge he has given me is "Let Mr Clennam
have the means of putting himself on a perfect equality with me as to
knowing whatever I know. If it should come to nothing after all, he
will respect my confidence. Unless I was sure of that to begin with, I
should have nothing to do with him." And there, you see,' said Mr
Meagles, 'you have Daniel Doyce all over.'

'A very honourable character.'

'Oh, yes, to be sure. Not a doubt of it. Odd, but very honourable. Very
odd though. Now, would you believe, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, with
a hearty enjoyment of his friend's eccentricity, 'that I had a whole
morning in What's-his-name Yard--'

'Bleeding Heart?'

'A whole morning in Bleeding Heart Yard, before I could induce him to
pursue the subject at all?'

'How was that?'

'How was that, my friend? I no sooner mentioned your name in connection
with it than he declared off.'

'Declared off on my account?'

'I no sooner mentioned your name, Clennam, than he said, "That will
never do!" What did he mean by that? I asked him. No matter, Meagles;
that would never do. Why would it never do? You'll hardly believe it,
Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, laughing within himself, 'but it came out
that it would never do, because you and he, walking down to Twickenham
together, had glided into a friendly conversation in the course of which
he had referred to his intention of taking a partner, supposing at the
time that you were as firmly and finally settled as St Paul's Cathedral.
"Whereas," says he, "Mr Clennam might now believe, if I entertained his
proposition, that I had a sinister and designing motive in what was open
free speech. Which I can't bear," says he, "which I really am too proud
to bear."'

'I should as soon suspect--'

'Of course you would,' interrupted Mr Meagles, 'and so I told him. But
it took a morning to scale that wall; and I doubt if any other man
than myself (he likes me of old) could have got his leg over it. Well,
Clennam. This business-like obstacle surmounted, he then stipulated that
before resuming with you I should look over the books and form my own
opinion. I looked over the books, and formed my own opinion. "Is it, on
the whole, for, or against?" says he. "For," says I. "Then," says he,
"you may now, my good friend, give Mr Clennam the means of forming
his opinion. To enable him to do which, without bias and with perfect
freedom, I shall go out of town for a week." And he's gone,' said Mr
Meagles; 'that's the rich conclusion of the thing.'

'Leaving me,' said Clennam, 'with a high sense, I must say, of his
candour and his--'

'Oddity,' Mr Meagles struck in. 'I should think so!'

It was not exactly the word on Clennam's lips, but he forbore to
interrupt his good-humoured friend.

'And now,' added Mr Meagles, 'you can begin to look into matters as soon
as you think proper. I have undertaken to explain where you may want
explanation, but to be strictly impartial, and to do nothing more.'

They began their perquisitions in Bleeding Heart Yard that same
forenoon. Little peculiarities were easily to be detected by experienced
eyes in Mr Doyce's way of managing his affairs, but they almost always
involved some ingenious simplification of a difficulty, and some plain
road to the desired end. That his papers were in arrear, and that he
stood in need of assistance to develop the capacity of his business, was
clear enough; but all the results of his undertakings during many years
were distinctly set forth, and were ascertainable with ease. Nothing had
been done for the purposes of the pending investigation; everything was
in its genuine working dress, and in a certain honest rugged order. The
calculations and entries, in his own hand, of which there were many,
were bluntly written, and with no very neat precision; but were always
plain and directed straight to the purpose. It occurred to Arthur that
a far more elaborate and taking show of business--such as the records of
the Circumlocution Office made perhaps--might be far less serviceable,
as being meant to be far less intelligible.

Three or four days of steady application tendered him master of all the
facts it was essential to become acquainted with. Mr Meagles was at hand
the whole time, always ready to illuminate any dim place with the bright
little safety-lamp belonging to the scales and scoop. Between them they
agreed upon the sum it would be fair to offer for the purchase of a
half-share in the business, and then Mr Meagles unsealed a paper in
which Daniel Doyce had noted the amount at which he valued it; which was
even something less. Thus, when Daniel came back, he found the affair as
good as concluded.

'And I may now avow, Mr Clennam,' said he, with a cordial shake of the
hand, 'that if I had looked high and low for a partner, I believe I
could not have found one more to my mind.'

'I say the same,' said Clennam.

'And I say of both of you,' added Mr Meagles, 'that you are well
matched. You keep him in check, Clennam, with your common sense, and you
stick to the Works, Dan, with your--'

'Uncommon sense?' suggested Daniel, with his quiet smile.

'You may call it so, if you like--and each of you will be a right hand
to the other. Here's my own right hand upon it, as a practical man, to
both of you.'

The purchase was completed within a month. It left Arthur in possession
of private personal means not exceeding a few hundred pounds; but it
opened to him an active and promising career. The three friends dined
together on the auspicious occasion; the factory and the factory wives
and children made holiday and dined too; even Bleeding Heart Yard
dined and was full of meat. Two months had barely gone by in all, when
Bleeding Heart Yard had become so familiar with short-commons again,
that the treat was forgotten there; when nothing seemed new in the
partnership but the paint of the inscription on the door-posts, DOYCE
AND CLENNAM; when it appeared even to Clennam himself, that he had had
the affairs of the firm in his mind for years.

The little counting-house reserved for his own occupation, was a room of
wood and glass at the end of a long low workshop, filled with benches,
and vices, and tools, and straps, and wheels; which, when they were
in gear with the steam-engine, went tearing round as though they had a
suicidal mission to grind the business to dust and tear the factory to
pieces. A communication of great trap-doors in the floor and roof with
the workshop above and the workshop below, made a shaft of light in
this perspective, which brought to Clennam's mind the child's old
picture-book, where similar rays were the witnesses of Abel's
murder. The noises were sufficiently removed and shut out from the
counting-house to blend into a busy hum, interspersed with periodical
clinks and thumps. The patient figures at work were swarthy with the
filings of iron and steel that danced on every bench and bubbled up
through every chink in the planking. The workshop was arrived at by a
step-ladder from the outer yard below, where it served as a shelter for
the large grindstone where tools were sharpened. The whole had at once
a fanciful and practical air in Clennam's eyes, which was a welcome
change; and, as often as he raised them from his first work of getting
the array of business documents into perfect order, he glanced at these
things with a feeling of pleasure in his pursuit that was new to him.

Raising his eyes thus one day, he was surprised to see a bonnet
labouring up the step-ladder. The unusual apparition was followed by
another bonnet. He then perceived that the first bonnet was on the head
of Mr F.'s Aunt, and that the second bonnet was on the head of Flora,
who seemed to have propelled her legacy up the steep ascent with
considerable difficulty.

Though not altogether enraptured at the sight of these visitors, Clennam
lost no time in opening the counting-house door, and extricating them
from the workshop; a rescue which was rendered the more necessary by Mr
F.'s Aunt already stumbling over some impediment, and menacing steam
power as an Institution with a stony reticule she carried.

'Good gracious, Arthur,--I should say Mr Clennam, far more proper--the
climb we have had to get up here and how ever to get down again without
a fire-escape and Mr F.'s Aunt slipping through the steps and bruised
all over and you in the machinery and foundry way too only think, and
never told us!'

Thus, Flora, out of breath. Meanwhile, Mr F.'s Aunt rubbed her esteemed
insteps with her umbrella, and vindictively glared.

'Most unkind never to have come back to see us since that day, though
naturally it was not to be expected that there should be any attraction
at _our_ house and you were much more pleasantly engaged, that's pretty
certain, and is she fair or dark blue eyes or black I wonder, not that
I expect that she should be anything but a perfect contrast to me in all
particulars for I am a disappointment as I very well know and you are
quite right to be devoted no doubt though what I am saying Arthur never
mind I hardly know myself Good gracious!'

By this time he had placed chairs for them in the counting-house. As
Flora dropped into hers, she bestowed the old look upon him.

'And to think of Doyce and Clennam, and who Doyce can be,' said Flora;
'delightful man no doubt and married perhaps or perhaps a daughter, now
has he really? then one understands the partnership and sees it all,
don't tell me anything about it for I know I have no claim to ask the
question the golden chain that once was forged being snapped and very
proper.'

Flora put her hand tenderly on his, and gave him another of the youthful
glances.

'Dear Arthur--force of habit, Mr Clennam every way more delicate and
adapted to existing circumstances--I must beg to be excused for taking
the liberty of this intrusion but I thought I might so far presume upon
old times for ever faded never more to bloom as to call with Mr F.'s
Aunt to congratulate and offer best wishes, A great deal superior to
China not to be denied and much nearer though higher up!'

'I am very happy to see you,' said Clennam, 'and I thank you, Flora,
very much for your kind remembrance.'

'More than I can say myself at any rate,' returned Flora, 'for I might
have been dead and buried twenty distinct times over and no doubt
whatever should have been before you had genuinely remembered Me or
anything like it in spite of which one last remark I wish to make, one
last explanation I wish to offer--'

'My dear Mrs Finching,' Arthur remonstrated in alarm.

'Oh not that disagreeable name, say Flora!'

'Flora, is it worth troubling yourself afresh to enter into
explanations? I assure you none are needed. I am satisfied--I am
perfectly satisfied.'

A diversion was occasioned here, by Mr F.'s Aunt making the following
inexorable and awful statement:

'There's mile-stones on the Dover road!'

With such mortal hostility towards the human race did she discharge this
missile, that Clennam was quite at a loss how to defend himself; the
rather as he had been already perplexed in his mind by the honour of a
