'--And I shall be glad to enter into the subject, provided Mr Doyce
responds, and you think well of it. If you will at present, therefore,
allow me to place it in your hands, you will much oblige me.'

'Clennam, I accept the trust with readiness,' said Mr Meagles. 'And
without anticipating any of the points which you, as a man of business,
have of course reserved, I am free to say to you that I think something
may come of this. Of one thing you may be perfectly certain. Daniel is
an honest man.'

'I am so sure of it that I have promptly made up my mind to speak to
you.'

'You must guide him, you know; you must steer him; you must direct him;
he is one of a crotchety sort,' said Mr Meagles, evidently meaning
nothing more than that he did new things and went new ways; 'but he is
as honest as the sun, and so good night!'

Clennam went back to his room, sat down again before his fire, and made
up his mind that he was glad he had resolved not to fall in love with
Pet. She was so beautiful, so amiable, so apt to receive any true
impression given to her gentle nature and her innocent heart, and make
the man who should be so happy as to communicate it, the most fortunate
and enviable of all men, that he was very glad indeed he had come to
that conclusion.

But, as this might have been a reason for coming to the opposite
conclusion, he followed out the theme again a little way in his mind; to
justify himself, perhaps.

'Suppose that a man,' so his thoughts ran, 'who had been of age some
twenty years or so; who was a diffident man, from the circumstances of
his youth; who was rather a grave man, from the tenor of his life; who
knew himself to be deficient in many little engaging qualities which
he admired in others, from having been long in a distant region, with
nothing softening near him; who had no kind sisters to present to her;
who had no congenial home to make her known in; who was a stranger in
the land; who had not a fortune to compensate, in any measure, for
these defects; who had nothing in his favour but his honest love and his
general wish to do right--suppose such a man were to come to this house,
and were to yield to the captivation of this charming girl, and were to
persuade himself that he could hope to win her; what a weakness it would
be!'

He softly opened his window, and looked out upon the serene river. Year
after year so much allowance for the drifting of the ferry-boat, so
many miles an hour the flowing of the stream, here the rushes, there the
lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet.

Why should he be vexed or sore at heart? It was not his weakness that he
had imagined. It was nobody's, nobody's within his knowledge; why should
it trouble him? And yet it did trouble him. And he thought--who has not
thought for a moment, sometimes?--that it might be better to flow away
monotonously, like the river, and to compound for its insensibility to
happiness with its insensibility to pain.




CHAPTER 17. Nobody's Rival


Before breakfast in the morning, Arthur walked out to look about him.
As the morning was fine and he had an hour on his hands, he crossed the
river by the ferry, and strolled along a footpath through some meadows.
When he came back to the towing-path, he found the ferry-boat on the
opposite side, and a gentleman hailing it and waiting to be taken over.

This gentleman looked barely thirty. He was well dressed, of a sprightly
and gay appearance, a well-knit figure, and a rich dark complexion. As
Arthur came over the stile and down to the water's edge, the lounger
glanced at him for a moment, and then resumed his occupation of idly
tossing stones into the water with his foot. There was something in his
way of spurning them out of their places with his heel, and getting them
into the required position, that Clennam thought had an air of cruelty
in it. Most of us have more or less frequently derived a similar
impression from a man's manner of doing some very little thing: plucking
a flower, clearing away an obstacle, or even destroying an insentient
object.

The gentleman's thoughts were preoccupied, as his face showed, and he
took no notice of a fine Newfoundland dog, who watched him attentively,
and watched every stone too, in its turn, eager to spring into the
river on receiving his master's sign. The ferry-boat came over, however,
without his receiving any sign, and when it grounded his master took him
by the collar and walked him into it.

'Not this morning,' he said to the dog. 'You won't do for ladies'
company, dripping wet. Lie down.'

Clennam followed the man and the dog into the boat, and took his seat.
The dog did as he was ordered. The man remained standing, with his hands
in his pockets, and towered between Clennam and the prospect. Man and
dog both jumped lightly out as soon as they touched the other side, and
went away. Clennam was glad to be rid of them.

The church clock struck the breakfast hour as he walked up the little
lane by which the garden-gate was approached. The moment he pulled the
bell a deep loud barking assailed him from within the wall.

'I heard no dog last night,' thought Clennam. The gate was opened by
one of the rosy maids, and on the lawn were the Newfoundland dog and the
man.

'Miss Minnie is not down yet, gentlemen,' said the blushing portress, as
they all came together in the garden. Then she said to the master of the
dog, 'Mr Clennam, sir,' and tripped away.

'Odd enough, Mr Clennam, that we should have met just now,' said
the man. Upon which the dog became mute. 'Allow me to introduce
myself--Henry Gowan. A pretty place this, and looks wonderfully well
this morning!'

The manner was easy, and the voice agreeable; but still Clennam thought,
that if he had not made that decided resolution to avoid falling in love
with Pet, he would have taken a dislike to this Henry Gowan.

'It's new to you, I believe?' said this Gowan, when Arthur had extolled
the place.

'Quite new. I made acquaintance with it only yesterday afternoon.'

'Ah! Of course this is not its best aspect. It used to look charming in
the spring, before they went away last time. I should like you to have
seen it then.'

But for that resolution so often recalled, Clennam might have wished him
in the crater of Mount Etna, in return for this civility.

'I have had the pleasure of seeing it under many circumstances during
the last three years, and it's--a Paradise.'

It was (at least it might have been, always excepting for that wise
resolution) like his dexterous impudence to call it a Paradise. He only
called it a Paradise because he first saw her coming, and so made her
out within her hearing to be an angel, Confusion to him!

And ah! how beaming she looked, and how glad! How she caressed the dog,
and how the dog knew her! How expressive that heightened colour in her
face, that fluttered manner, her downcast eyes, her irresolute
happiness! When had Clennam seen her look like this? Not that there was
any reason why he might, could, would, or should have ever seen her look
like this, or that he had ever hoped for himself to see her look like
this; but still--when had he ever known her do it!

He stood at a little distance from them. This Gowan when he had talked
about a Paradise, had gone up to her and taken her hand. The dog had put
his great paws on her arm and laid his head against her dear bosom. She
had laughed and welcomed them, and made far too much of the dog, far,
far, too much--that is to say, supposing there had been any third person
looking on who loved her.

She disengaged herself now, and came to Clennam, and put her hand in his
and wished him good morning, and gracefully made as if she would take
his arm and be escorted into the house. To this Gowan had no objection.
No, he knew he was too safe.

There was a passing cloud on Mr Meagles's good-humoured face when they
all three (four, counting the dog, and he was the most objectionable
but one of the party) came in to breakfast. Neither it, nor the touch
of uneasiness on Mrs Meagles as she directed her eyes towards it, was
unobserved by Clennam.

'Well, Gowan,' said Mr Meagles, even suppressing a sigh; 'how goes the
world with you this morning?'

'Much as usual, sir. Lion and I being determined not to waste anything
of our weekly visit, turned out early, and came over from Kingston, my
present headquarters, where I am making a sketch or two.' Then he told
how he had met Mr Clennam at the ferry, and they had come over together.

'Mrs Gowan is well, Henry?' said Mrs Meagles. (Clennam became
attentive.)

'My mother is quite well, thank you.' (Clennam became inattentive.) 'I
have taken the liberty of making an addition to your family dinner-party
to-day, which I hope will not be inconvenient to you or to Mr Meagles. I
couldn't very well get out of it,' he explained, turning to the latter.
'The young fellow wrote to propose himself to me; and as he is well
connected, I thought you would not object to my transferring him here.'

'Who _is_ the young fellow?' asked Mr Meagles with peculiar complacency.

'He is one of the Barnacles. Tite Barnacle's son, Clarence Barnacle, who
is in his father's Department. I can at least guarantee that the river
shall not suffer from his visit. He won't set it on fire.'

'Aye, aye?' said Meagles. 'A Barnacle is he? _We_ know something of that
family, eh, Dan? By George, they are at the top of the tree, though! Let
me see. What relation will this young fellow be to Lord Decimus now? His
Lordship married, in seventeen ninety-seven, Lady Jemima Bilberry, who
was the second daughter by the third marriage--no! There I am wrong!
That was Lady Seraphina--Lady Jemima was the first daughter by the
second marriage of the fifteenth Earl of Stiltstalking with the
Honourable Clementina Toozellem. Very well. Now this young fellow's
father married a Stiltstalking and _his_ father married his cousin who
was a Barnacle. The father of that father who married a Barnacle,
married a Joddleby.--I am getting a little too far back, Gowan; I want
to make out what relation this young fellow is to Lord Decimus.'

'That's easily stated. His father is nephew to Lord Decimus.'

'Nephew--to--Lord--Decimus,' Mr Meagles luxuriously repeated with his
eyes shut, that he might have nothing to distract him from the full
flavour of the genealogical tree. 'By George, you are right, Gowan. So
he is.'

'Consequently, Lord Decimus is his great uncle.'

'But stop a bit!' said Mr Meagles, opening his eyes with a fresh
discovery. 'Then on the mother's side, Lady Stiltstalking is his great
aunt.'

'Of course she is.'

'Aye, aye, aye?' said Mr Meagles with much interest. 'Indeed, indeed? We
shall be glad to see him. We'll entertain him as well as we can, in our
humble way; and we shall not starve him, I hope, at all events.'

In the beginning of this dialogue, Clennam had expected some great
harmless outburst from Mr Meagles, like that which had made him burst
out of the Circumlocution Office, holding Doyce by the collar. But his
good friend had a weakness which none of us need go into the next street
to find, and which no amount of Circumlocution experience could long
subdue in him. Clennam looked at Doyce; but Doyce knew all about it
beforehand, and looked at his plate, and made no sign, and said no word.

'I am much obliged to you,' said Gowan, to conclude the subject.
'Clarence is a great ass, but he is one of the dearest and best fellows
that ever lived!'

It appeared, before the breakfast was over, that everybody whom this
Gowan knew was either more or less of an ass, or more or less of a
knave; but was, notwithstanding, the most lovable, the most engaging,
the simplest, truest, kindest, dearest, best fellow that ever lived.
The process by which this unvarying result was attained, whatever the
premises, might have been stated by Mr Henry Gowan thus: 'I claim to be
always book-keeping, with a peculiar nicety, in every man's case, and
posting up a careful little account of Good and Evil with him. I do
this so conscientiously, that I am happy to tell you I find the most
worthless of men to be the dearest old fellow too: and am in a condition
to make the gratifying report, that there is much less difference than
you are inclined to suppose between an honest man and a scoundrel.' The
effect of this cheering discovery happened to be, that while he seemed
to be scrupulously finding good in most men, he did in reality lower
it where it was, and set it up where it was not; but that was its only
disagreeable or dangerous feature.

It scarcely seemed, however, to afford Mr Meagles as much satisfaction
as the Barnacle genealogy had done. The cloud that Clennam had never
seen upon his face before that morning, frequently overcast it again;
and there was the same shadow of uneasy observation of him on the comely
face of his wife. More than once or twice when Pet caressed the dog,
it appeared to Clennam that her father was unhappy in seeing her do it;
and, in one particular instance when Gowan stood on the other side of
the dog, and bent his head at the same time, Arthur fancied that he saw
tears rise to Mr Meagles's eyes as he hurried out of the room. It was
either the fact too, or he fancied further, that Pet herself was not
insensible to these little incidents; that she tried, with a more
delicate affection than usual, to express to her good father how much
she loved him; that it was on this account that she fell behind the
rest, both as they went to church and as they returned from it, and
took his arm. He could not have sworn but that as he walked alone in
the garden afterwards, he had an instantaneous glimpse of her in
her father's room, clinging to both her parents with the greatest
tenderness, and weeping on her father's shoulder.

The latter part of the day turning out wet, they were fain to keep the
house, look over Mr Meagles's collection, and beguile the time with
conversation. This Gowan had plenty to say for himself, and said it
in an off-hand and amusing manner. He appeared to be an artist by
profession, and to have been at Rome some time; yet he had a slight,
careless, amateur way with him--a perceptible limp, both in his devotion
to art and his attainments--which Clennam could scarcely understand.

He applied to Daniel Doyce for help, as they stood together, looking out
of window.

'You know Mr Gowan?' he said in a low voice.

'I have seen him here. Comes here every Sunday when they are at home.'

'An artist, I infer from what he says?'

'A sort of a one,' said Daniel Doyce, in a surly tone.

'What sort of a one?' asked Clennam, with a smile.

'Why, he has sauntered into the Arts at a leisurely Pall-Mall pace,'
said Doyce, 'and I doubt if they care to be taken quite so coolly.'

Pursuing his inquiries, Clennam found that the Gowan family were a very
distant ramification of the Barnacles; and that the paternal Gowan,
originally attached to a legation abroad, had been pensioned off as a
Commissioner of nothing particular somewhere or other, and had died at
his post with his drawn salary in his hand, nobly defending it to the
last extremity. In consideration of this eminent public service, the
Barnacle then in power had recommended the Crown to bestow a pension of
two or three hundred a-year on his widow; to which the next Barnacle in
power had added certain shady and sedate apartments in the Palaces at
Hampton Court, where the old lady still lived, deploring the degeneracy
of the times in company with several other old ladies of both sexes. Her
son, Mr Henry Gowan, inheriting from his father, the Commissioner, that
very questionable help in life, a very small independence, had been
difficult to settle; the rather, as public appointments chanced to
be scarce, and his genius, during his earlier manhood, was of that
exclusively agricultural character which applies itself to the
cultivation of wild oats. At last he had declared that he would become
a Painter; partly because he had always had an idle knack that way,
and partly to grieve the souls of the Barnacles-in-chief who had not
provided for him. So it had come to pass successively, first, that
several distinguished ladies had been frightfully shocked; then, that
portfolios of his performances had been handed about o' nights, and
declared with ecstasy to be perfect Claudes, perfect Cuyps, perfect
phaenomena; then, that Lord Decimus had bought his picture, and had
asked the President and Council to dinner at a blow, and had said, with
his own magnificent gravity, 'Do you know, there appears to me to
be really immense merit in that work?' and, in short, that people of
condition had absolutely taken pains to bring him into fashion. But,
somehow, it had all failed. The prejudiced public had stood out against
it obstinately. They had determined not to admire Lord Decimus's
picture. They had determined to believe that in every service, except
their own, a man must qualify himself, by striving early and late, and
by working heart and soul, might and main. So now Mr Gowan, like that
worn-out old coffin which never was Mahomet's nor anybody else's, hung
midway between two points: jaundiced and jealous as to the one he had
left: jaundiced and jealous as to the other that he couldn't reach.

Such was the substance of Clennam's discoveries concerning him, made
that rainy Sunday afternoon and afterwards.

About an hour or so after dinner time, Young Barnacle appeared, attended
by his eye-glass; in honour of whose family connections, Mr Meagles had
cashiered the pretty parlour-maids for the day, and had placed on duty
in their stead two dingy men. Young Barnacle was in the last
degree amazed and disconcerted at sight of Arthur, and had murmured
involuntarily, 'Look here! upon my soul, you know!' before his presence
of mind returned.

Even then, he was obliged to embrace the earliest opportunity of taking
his friend into a window, and saying, in a nasal way that was a part of
his general debility:

'I want to speak to you, Gowan. I say. Look here. Who is that fellow?'

'A friend of our host's. None of mine.'

'He's a most ferocious Radical, you know,' said Young Barnacle.

'Is he? How do you know?'

'Ecod, sir, he was Pitching into our people the other day in the most
tremendous manner. Went up to our place and Pitched into my father to
that extent that it was necessary to order him out. Came back to
our Department, and Pitched into me. Look here. You never saw such a
fellow.'

'What did he want?'

'Ecod, sir,' returned Young Barnacle, 'he said he wanted to know, you
know! Pervaded our Department--without an appointment--and said he
wanted to know!'

The stare of indignant wonder with which Young Barnacle accompanied
this disclosure, would have strained his eyes injuriously but for
the opportune relief of dinner. Mr Meagles (who had been extremely
solicitous to know how his uncle and aunt were) begged him to conduct
Mrs Meagles to the dining-room. And when he sat on Mrs Meagles's right
hand, Mr Meagles looked as gratified as if his whole family were there.

All the natural charm of the previous day was gone. The eaters of the
dinner, like the dinner itself, were lukewarm, insipid, overdone--and
all owing to this poor little dull Young Barnacle. Conversationless at
any time, he was now the victim of a weakness special to the occasion,
and solely referable to Clennam. He was under a pressing and continual
necessity of looking at that gentleman, which occasioned his eye-glass
to get into his soup, into his wine-glass, into Mrs Meagles's plate, to
hang down his back like a bell-rope, and be several times disgracefully
restored to his bosom by one of the dingy men. Weakened in mind by his
frequent losses of this instrument, and its determination not to stick
in his eye, and more and more enfeebled in intellect every time he
looked at the mysterious Clennam, he applied spoons to his eyes,
forks, and other foreign matters connected with the furniture of the
dinner-table. His discovery of these mistakes greatly increased his
difficulties, but never released him from the necessity of looking at
Clennam. And whenever Clennam spoke, this ill-starred young man was
clearly seized with a dread that he was coming, by some artful device,
round to that point of wanting to know, you know.

It may be questioned, therefore, whether any one but Mr Meagles had much
enjoyment of the time. Mr Meagles, however, thoroughly enjoyed Young
Barnacle. As a mere flask of the golden water in the tale became a full
fountain when it was poured out, so Mr Meagles seemed to feel that this
small spice of Barnacle imparted to his table the flavour of the whole
family-tree. In its presence, his frank, fine, genuine qualities
paled; he was not so easy, he was not so natural, he was striving after
something that did not belong to him, he was not himself. What a strange
peculiarity on the part of Mr Meagles, and where should we find another
such case!

At last the wet Sunday wore itself out in a wet night; and Young
Barnacle went home in a cab, feebly smoking; and the objectionable Gowan
went away on foot, accompanied by the objectionable dog. Pet had taken
the most amiable pains all day to be friendly with Clennam, but Clennam
had been a little reserved since breakfast--that is to say, would have
been, if he had loved her.

When he had gone to his own room, and had again thrown himself into the
chair by the fire, Mr Doyce knocked at the door, candle in hand, to
ask him how and at what hour he proposed returning on the morrow? After
settling this question, he said a word to Mr Doyce about this Gowan--who
would have run in his head a good deal, if he had been his rival.

'Those are not good prospects for a painter,' said Clennam.

'No,' returned Doyce.

Mr Doyce stood, chamber-candlestick in hand, the other hand in his
pocket, looking hard at the flame of his candle, with a certain quiet
perception in his face that they were going to say something more.

'I thought our good friend a little changed, and out of spirits, after
he came this morning?' said Clennam.

'Yes,' returned Doyce.

'But not his daughter?' said Clennam.

'No,' said Doyce.

There was a pause on both sides. Mr Doyce, still looking at the flame of
his candle, slowly resumed:

'The truth is, he has twice taken his daughter abroad in the hope of
separating her from Mr Gowan. He rather thinks she is disposed to like
him, and he has painful doubts (I quite agree with him, as I dare say
you do) of the hopefulness of such a marriage.'

'There--' Clennam choked, and coughed, and stopped.

'Yes, you have taken cold,' said Daniel Doyce. But without looking at
him.

'--There is an engagement between them, of course?' said Clennam airily.

'No. As I am told, certainly not. It has been solicited on the
gentleman's part, but none has been made. Since their recent return,
our friend has yielded to a weekly visit, but that is the utmost. Minnie
would not deceive her father and mother. You have travelled with them,
and I believe you know what a bond there is among them, extending even
beyond this present life. All that there is between Miss Minnie and Mr
Gowan, I have no doubt we see.'

'Ah! We see enough!' cried Arthur.

Mr Doyce wished him Good Night in the tone of a man who had heard a
mournful, not to say despairing, exclamation, and who sought to infuse
some encouragement and hope into the mind of the person by whom it had
been uttered. Such tone was probably a part of his oddity, as one of
a crotchety band; for how could he have heard anything of that kind,
without Clennam's hearing it too?

The rain fell heavily on the roof, and pattered on the ground, and
dripped among the evergreens and the leafless branches of the trees. The
rain fell heavily, drearily. It was a night of tears.

If Clennam had not decided against falling in love with Pet; if he
had had the weakness to do it; if he had, little by little, persuaded
himself to set all the earnestness of his nature, all the might of his
hope, and all the wealth of his matured character, on that cast; if
he had done this and found that all was lost; he would have been,
that night, unutterably miserable. As it was--

As it was, the rain fell heavily, drearily.




CHAPTER 18. Little Dorrit's Lover


Little Dorrit had not attained her twenty-second birthday without
finding a lover. Even in the shallow Marshalsea, the ever young Archer
shot off a few featherless arrows now and then from a mouldy bow, and
winged a Collegian or two.

Little Dorrit's lover, however, was not a Collegian. He was the
sentimental son of a turnkey. His father hoped, in the fulness of time,
to leave him the inheritance of an unstained key; and had from his
early youth familiarised him with the duties of his office, and with an
ambition to retain the prison-lock in the family. While the succession
was yet in abeyance, he assisted his mother in the conduct of a snug
tobacco business round the corner of Horsemonger Lane (his father being
a non-resident turnkey), which could usually command a neat connection
within the College walls.

Years agone, when the object of his affections was wont to sit in her
little arm-chair by the high Lodge-fender, Young John (family name,
Chivery), a year older than herself, had eyed her with admiring wonder.
When he had played with her in the yard, his favourite game had been to
counterfeit locking her up in corners, and to counterfeit letting
her out for real kisses. When he grew tall enough to peep through the
keyhole of the great lock of the main door, he had divers times set down
his father's dinner, or supper, to get on as it might on the outer side
thereof, while he stood taking cold in one eye by dint of peeping at her
through that airy perspective.

If Young John had ever slackened in his truth in the less penetrable
days of his boyhood, when youth is prone to wear its boots unlaced and
is happily unconscious of digestive organs, he had soon strung it up
again and screwed it tight. At nineteen, his hand had inscribed in chalk
on that part of the wall which fronted her lodgings, on the occasion of
her birthday, 'Welcome sweet nursling of the Fairies!' At twenty-three,
the same hand falteringly presented cigars on Sundays to the Father of
the Marshalsea, and Father of the queen of his soul.

Young John was small of stature, with rather weak legs and very weak
light hair. One of his eyes (perhaps the eye that used to peep through
the keyhole) was also weak, and looked larger than the other, as if
it couldn't collect itself. Young John was gentle likewise. But he was
great of soul. Poetical, expansive, faithful.

Though too humble before the ruler of his heart to be sanguine, Young
John had considered the object of his attachment in all its lights and
shades. Following it out to blissful results, he had descried, without
self-commendation, a fitness in it. Say things prospered, and they were
united. She, the child of the Marshalsea; he, the lock-keeper. There
was a fitness in that. Say he became a resident turnkey. She would
officially succeed to the chamber she had rented so long. There was a
beautiful propriety in that. It looked over the wall, if you stood on
tip-toe; and, with a trellis-work of scarlet beans and a canary or so,
would become a very Arbour. There was a charming idea in that. Then,
being all in all to one another, there was even an appropriate grace in
the lock. With the world shut out (except that part of it which would
be shut in); with its troubles and disturbances only known to them by
hearsay, as they would be described by the pilgrims tarrying with them
on their way to the Insolvent Shrine; with the Arbour above, and the
Lodge below; they would glide down the stream of time, in pastoral
domestic happiness. Young John drew tears from his eyes by finishing the
picture with a tombstone in the adjoining churchyard, close against the
prison wall, bearing the following touching inscription: 'Sacred to
the Memory Of JOHN CHIVERY, Sixty years Turnkey, and fifty years
Head Turnkey, Of the neighbouring Marshalsea, Who departed this life,
universally respected, on the thirty-first of December, One thousand
eight hundred and eighty-six, Aged eighty-three years. Also of his truly
beloved and truly loving wife, AMY, whose maiden name was DORRIT, Who
survived his loss not quite forty-eight hours, And who breathed her last
in the Marshalsea aforesaid. There she was born, There she lived, There
she died.'

The Chivery parents were not ignorant of their son's attachment--indeed
it had, on some exceptional occasions, thrown him into a state of mind
that had impelled him to conduct himself with irascibility towards the
customers, and damage the business--but they, in their turns, had worked
it out to desirable conclusions. Mrs Chivery, a prudent woman, had
desired her husband to take notice that their John's prospects of the
Lock would certainly be strengthened by an alliance with Miss Dorrit,
who had herself a kind of claim upon the College and was much respected
there. Mrs Chivery had desired her husband to take notice that if, on
the one hand, their John had means and a post of trust, on the other
hand, Miss Dorrit had family; and that her (Mrs Chivery's) sentiment
was, that two halves made a whole. Mrs Chivery, speaking as a mother and
not as a diplomatist, had then, from a different point of view, desired
her husband to recollect that their John had never been strong, and
that his love had fretted and worrited him enough as it was, without
his being driven to do himself a mischief, as nobody couldn't say
he wouldn't be if he was crossed. These arguments had so powerfully
influenced the mind of Mr Chivery, who was a man of few words, that he
had on sundry Sunday mornings, given his boy what he termed 'a lucky
touch,' signifying that he considered such commendation of him to Good
Fortune, preparatory to his that day declaring his passion and
becoming triumphant. But Young John had never taken courage to make
the declaration; and it was principally on these occasions that he had
returned excited to the tobacco shop, and flown at the customers.

In this affair, as in every other, Little Dorrit herself was the last
person considered. Her brother and sister were aware of it, and attained
a sort of station by making a peg of it on which to air the miserably
ragged old fiction of the family gentility. Her sister asserted the
family gentility by flouting the poor swain as he loitered about the
prison for glimpses of his dear. Tip asserted the family gentility, and
his own, by coming out in the character of the aristocratic brother, and
loftily swaggering in the little skittle ground respecting seizures by
the scruff of the neck, which there were looming probabilities of some
gentleman unknown executing on some little puppy not mentioned. These
were not the only members of the Dorrit family who turned it to account.
No, no. The Father of the Marshalsea was supposed to know nothing about
the matter, of course: his poor dignity could not see so low. But he
took the cigars, on Sundays, and was glad to get them; and sometimes
even condescended to walk up and down the yard with the donor (who was
proud and hopeful then), and benignantly to smoke one in his society.
With no less readiness and condescension did he receive attentions from
Chivery Senior, who always relinquished his arm-chair and newspaper to
him, when he came into the Lodge during one of his spells of duty; and
who had even mentioned to him, that, if he would like at any time after
dusk quietly to step out into the fore-court and take a look at the
street, there was not much to prevent him. If he did not avail himself
of this latter civility, it was only because he had lost the relish for
it; inasmuch as he took everything else he could get, and would say at
times, 'Extremely civil person, Chivery; very attentive man and very
respectful. Young Chivery, too; really almost with a delicate perception
of one's position here. A very well conducted family indeed, the
Chiveries. Their behaviour gratifies me.'

The devoted Young John all this time regarded the family with reverence.
He never dreamed of disputing their pretensions, but did homage to the
miserable Mumbo jumbo they paraded. As to resenting any affront from _her_
brother, he would have felt, even if he had not naturally been of a most
pacific disposition, that to wag his tongue or lift his hand against
that sacred gentleman would be an unhallowed act. He was sorry that
his noble mind should take offence; still, he felt the fact to be not
incompatible with its nobility, and sought to propitiate and conciliate
that gallant soul. Her father, a gentleman in misfortune--a gentleman of
a fine spirit and courtly manners, who always bore with him--he deeply
honoured. Her sister he considered somewhat vain and proud, but a young
lady of infinite accomplishments, who could not forget the past. It was
an instinctive testimony to Little Dorrit's worth and difference from
all the rest, that the poor young fellow honoured and loved her for
being simply what she was.

The tobacco business round the corner of Horsemonger Lane was carried
out in a rural establishment one story high, which had the benefit of
the air from the yards of Horsemonger Lane jail, and the advantage of a
retired walk under the wall of that pleasant establishment. The business
was of too modest a character to support a life-size Highlander, but it
maintained a little one on a bracket on the door-post, who looked like
a fallen Cherub that had found it necessary to take to a kilt.

From the portal thus decorated, one Sunday after an early dinner of
baked viands, Young John issued forth on his usual Sunday errand; not
empty-handed, but with his offering of cigars. He was neatly attired in
a plum-coloured coat, with as large a collar of black velvet as his
figure could carry; a silken waistcoat, bedecked with golden sprigs; a
chaste neckerchief much in vogue at that day, representing a preserve of
lilac pheasants on a buff ground; pantaloons so highly decorated with
side-stripes that each leg was a three-stringed lute; and a hat of
state very high and hard. When the prudent Mrs Chivery perceived that
in addition to these adornments her John carried a pair of white kid
gloves, and a cane like a little finger-post, surmounted by an ivory
hand marshalling him the way that he should go; and when she saw him, in
this heavy marching order, turn the corner to the right; she remarked to
Mr Chivery, who was at home at the time, that she thought she knew which
way the wind blew.

The Collegians were entertaining a considerable number of visitors that
Sunday afternoon, and their Father kept his room for the purpose of
receiving presentations. After making the tour of the yard, Little
Dorrit's lover with a hurried heart went up-stairs, and knocked with his
knuckles at the Father's door.

'Come in, come in!' said a gracious voice. The Father's voice, her
father's, the Marshalsea's father's. He was seated in his black velvet
cap, with his newspaper, three-and-sixpence accidentally left on the
table, and two chairs arranged. Everything prepared for holding his
Court.

'Ah, Young John! How do you do, how do you do!'

'Pretty well, I thank you, sir. I hope you are the same.'

'Yes, John Chivery; yes. Nothing to complain of.'

'I have taken the liberty, sir, of--'

'Eh?' The Father of the Marshalsea always lifted up his eyebrows at this
point, and became amiably distraught and smilingly absent in mind.

'--A few cigars, sir.'

'Oh!' (For the moment, excessively surprised.) 'Thank you, Young John,
thank you. But really, I am afraid I am too--No? Well then, I will say
no more about it. Put them on the mantelshelf, if you please, Young
John. And sit down, sit down. You are not a stranger, John.'

'Thank you, sir, I am sure--Miss;' here Young John turned the great hat
round and round upon his left-hand, like a slowly twirling mouse-cage;
'Miss Amy quite well, sir?'

'Yes, John, yes; very well. She is out.'

'Indeed, sir?'

'Yes, John. Miss Amy is gone for an airing. My young people all go out a
good deal. But at their time of life, it's natural, John.'

'Very much so, I am sure, sir.'

'An airing. An airing. Yes.' He was blandly tapping his fingers on
the table, and casting his eyes up at the window. 'Amy has gone for
an airing on the Iron Bridge. She has become quite partial to the Iron
Bridge of late, and seems to like to walk there better than anywhere.'
He returned to conversation. 'Your father is not on duty at present, I
think, John?'

'No, sir, he comes on later in the afternoon.' Another twirl of the
great hat, and then Young John said, rising, 'I am afraid I must wish
you good day, sir.'

'So soon? Good day, Young John. Nay, nay,' with the utmost
condescension, 'never mind your glove, John. Shake hands with it on. You
are no stranger here, you know.'

Highly gratified by the kindness of his reception, Young John descended
the staircase. On his way down he met some Collegians bringing up
visitors to be presented, and at that moment Mr Dorrit happened to call
over the banisters with particular distinctness, 'Much obliged to you
for your little testimonial, John!'

Little Dorrit's lover very soon laid down his penny on the tollplate of
the Iron Bridge, and came upon it looking about him for the well-known
and well-beloved figure. At first he feared she was not there; but as he
walked on towards the Middlesex side, he saw her standing still, looking
at the water. She was absorbed in thought, and he wondered what
she might be thinking about. There were the piles of city roofs and
chimneys, more free from smoke than on week-days; and there were the
distant masts and steeples. Perhaps she was thinking about them.

Little Dorrit mused so long, and was so entirely preoccupied, that
although her lover stood quiet for what he thought was a long time, and
twice or thrice retired and came back again to the former spot, still
she did not move. So, in the end, he made up his mind to go on, and seem
to come upon her casually in passing, and speak to her. The place was
quiet, and now or never was the time to speak to her.

He walked on, and she did not appear to hear his steps until he was
close upon her. When he said 'Miss Dorrit!' she started and fell back
from him, with an expression in her face of fright and something like
dislike that caused him unutterable dismay. She had often avoided him
before--always, indeed, for a long, long while. She had turned away and
glided off so often when she had seen him coming toward her, that the
unfortunate Young John could not think it accidental. But he had hoped
that it might be shyness, her retiring character, her foreknowledge of
the state of his heart, anything short of aversion. Now, that momentary
look had said, 'You, of all people! I would rather have seen any one on
earth than you!'

It was but a momentary look, inasmuch as she checked it, and said in her
soft little voice, 'Oh, Mr John! Is it you?' But she felt what it had
been, as he felt what it had been; and they stood looking at one another
equally confused.

'Miss Amy, I am afraid I disturbed you by speaking to you.'

'Yes, rather. I--I came here to be alone, and I thought I was.'

'Miss Amy, I took the liberty of walking this way, because Mr Dorrit
chanced to mention, when I called upon him just now, that you--'

She caused him more dismay than before by suddenly murmuring, 'O father,
father!' in a heartrending tone, and turning her face away.

'Miss Amy, I hope I don't give you any uneasiness by naming Mr Dorrit.
I assure you I found him very well and in the best of Spirits, and he
showed me even more than his usual kindness; being so very kind as to
say that I was not a stranger there, and in all ways gratifying me very
much.'

To the inexpressible consternation of her lover, Little Dorrit, with her
hands to her averted face, and rocking herself where she stood as if she
were in pain, murmured, 'O father, how can you! O dear, dear father, how
can you, can you, do it!'

The poor fellow stood gazing at her, overflowing with sympathy, but not
knowing what to make of this, until, having taken out her handkerchief
and put it to her still averted face, she hurried away. At first he
remained stock still; then hurried after her.

'Miss Amy, pray! Will you have the goodness to stop a moment? Miss Amy,
if it comes to that, let _me_ go. I shall go out of my senses, if I have
to think that I have driven you away like this.'

His trembling voice and unfeigned earnestness brought Little Dorrit to
a stop. 'Oh, I don't know what to do,' she cried, 'I don't know what to
do!'

To Young John, who had never seen her bereft of her quiet self-command,
who had seen her from her infancy ever so reliable and self-suppressed,
there was a shock in her distress, and in having to associate himself
with it as its cause, that shook him from his great hat to the
pavement. He felt it necessary to explain himself. He might be
misunderstood--supposed to mean something, or to have done something,
that had never entered into his imagination. He begged her to hear him
explain himself, as the greatest favour she could show him.

'Miss Amy, I know very well that your family is far above mine. It were
vain to conceal it. There never was a Chivery a gentleman that ever
I heard of, and I will not commit the meanness of making a false
representation on a subject so momentous. Miss Amy, I know very well
that your high-souled brother, and likewise your spirited sister, spurn
me from a height. What I have to do is to respect them, to wish to be
admitted to their friendship, to look up at the eminence on which they
are placed from my lowlier station--for, whether viewed as tobacco or
viewed as the lock, I well know it is lowly--and ever wish them well and
happy.'

There really was a genuineness in the poor fellow, and a contrast
between the hardness of his hat and the softness of his heart (albeit,
perhaps, of his head, too), that was moving. Little Dorrit entreated him
to disparage neither himself nor his station, and, above all things, to
divest himself of any idea that she supposed hers to be superior. This
gave him a little comfort.

'Miss Amy,' he then stammered, 'I have had for a long time--ages they
seem to me--Revolving ages--a heart-cherished wish to say something to
you. May I say it?'

Little Dorrit involuntarily started from his side again, with the
faintest shadow of her former look; conquering that, she went on at
great speed half across the Bridge without replying!

'May I--Miss Amy, I but ask the question humbly--may I say it? I have
been so unlucky already in giving you pain without having any such
intentions, before the holy Heavens! that there is no fear of my saying
it unless I have your leave. I can be miserable alone, I can be cut up
by myself, why should I also make miserable and cut up one that I would
fling myself off that parapet to give half a moment's joy to! Not that
that's much to do, for I'd do it for twopence.'

The mournfulness of his spirits, and the gorgeousness of his appearance,
might have made him ridiculous, but that his delicacy made him
respectable. Little Dorrit learnt from it what to do.

'If you please, John Chivery,' she returned, trembling, but in a quiet
way, 'since you are so considerate as to ask me whether you shall say
any more--if you please, no.'

'Never, Miss Amy?'

'No, if you please. Never.'

'O Lord!' gasped Young John.

'But perhaps you will let me, instead, say something to you. I want
to say it earnestly, and with as plain a meaning as it is possible to
express. When you think of us, John--I mean my brother, and sister,
and me--don't think of us as being any different from the rest; for,
whatever we once were (which I hardly know) we ceased to be long ago,
and never can be any more. It will be much better for you, and much
better for others, if you will do that instead of what you are doing
now.'

Young John dolefully protested that he would try to bear it in mind, and
would be heartily glad to do anything she wished.

'As to me,' said Little Dorrit, 'think as little of me as you can; the
less, the better. When you think of me at all, John, let it only be as
the child you have seen grow up in the prison with one set of duties
always occupying her; as a weak, retired, contented, unprotected girl. I
particularly want you to remember, that when I come outside the gate, I
am unprotected and solitary.'

He would try to do anything she wished. But why did Miss Amy so much
want him to remember that?

'Because,' returned Little Dorrit, 'I know I can then quite trust you
not to forget to-day, and not to say any more to me. You are so generous
that I know I can trust to you for that; and I do and I always will. I
am going to show you, at once, that I fully trust you. I like this place
where we are speaking better than any place I know;' her slight colour
had faded, but her lover thought he saw it coming back just then; 'and I
may be often here. I know it is only necessary for me to tell you so, to
be quite sure that you will never come here again in search of me. And I
am--quite sure!'

She might rely upon it, said Young John. He was a miserable wretch, but
her word was more than a law for him.

'And good-bye, John,' said Little Dorrit. 'And I hope you will have a
good wife one day, and be a happy man. I am sure you will deserve to be
happy, and you will be, John.'

As she held out her hand to him with these words, the heart that was
under the waistcoat of sprigs--mere slop-work, if the truth must be
known--swelled to the size of the heart of a gentleman; and the poor
common little fellow, having no room to hold it, burst into tears.

'Oh, don't cry,' said Little Dorrit piteously. 'Don't, don't! Good-bye,
John. God bless you!'

'Good-bye, Miss Amy. Good-bye!'

And so he left her: first observing that she sat down on the corner of a
seat, and not only rested her little hand upon the rough wall, but laid
her face against it too, as if her head were heavy, and her mind were
sad.

It was an affecting illustration of the fallacy of human projects,
to behold her lover, with the great hat pulled over his eyes, the velvet
collar turned up as if it rained, the plum-coloured coat buttoned
to conceal the silken waistcoat of golden sprigs, and the little
direction-post pointing inexorably home, creeping along by the worst
back-streets, and composing, as he went, the following new inscription
for a tombstone in St George's Churchyard:

'Here lie the mortal remains Of JOHN CHIVERY, Never anything worth
mentioning, Who died about the end of the year one thousand eight
hundred and twenty-six, Of a broken heart, Requesting with his last
breath that the word AMY might be inscribed over his ashes, which was
accordingly directed to be done, By his afflicted Parents.'




CHAPTER 19. The Father of the Marshalsea in two or three Relations


The brothers William and Frederick Dorrit, walking up and down the
College-yard--of course on the aristocratic or Pump side, for the Father
made it a point of his state to be chary of going among his children
on the Poor side, except on Sunday mornings, Christmas Days, and other
occasions of ceremony, in the observance whereof he was very punctual,
and at which times he laid his hand upon the heads of their infants,
and blessed those young insolvents with a benignity that was highly
edifying--the brothers, walking up and down the College-yard together,
were a memorable sight. Frederick the free, was so humbled, bowed,
withered, and faded; William the bond, was so courtly, condescending,
and benevolently conscious of a position; that in this regard only, if
in no other, the brothers were a spectacle to wonder at.

They walked up and down the yard on the evening of Little Dorrit's
Sunday interview with her lover on the Iron Bridge. The cares of state
were over for that day, the Drawing Room had been well attended, several
new presentations had taken place, the three-and-sixpence accidentally
left on the table had accidentally increased to twelve shillings, and
the Father of the Marshalsea refreshed himself with a whiff of cigar. As
he walked up and down, affably accommodating his step to the shuffle of
his brother, not proud in his superiority, but considerate of that poor
creature, bearing with him, and breathing toleration of his infirmities
in every little puff of smoke that issued from his lips and aspired to
get over the spiked wall, he was a sight to wonder at.

His brother Frederick of the dim eye, palsied hand, bent form, and
groping mind, submissively shuffled at his side, accepting his patronage
as he accepted every incident of the labyrinthian world in which he had
got lost. He held the usual screwed bit of whitey-brown paper in his
hand, from which he ever and again unscrewed a spare pinch of snuff.
That falteringly taken, he would glance at his brother not unadmiringly,
put his hands behind him, and shuffle on so at his side until he took
another pinch, or stood still to look about him--perchance suddenly
missing his clarionet.

The College visitors were melting away as the shades of night drew on,
but the yard was still pretty full, the Collegians being mostly out,
seeing their friends to the Lodge. As the brothers paced the yard,
William the bond looked about him to receive salutes, returned them by
graciously lifting off his hat, and, with an engaging air, prevented
Frederick the free from running against the company, or being jostled
against the wall. The Collegians as a body were not easily impressible,
but even they, according to their various ways of wondering, appeared to
find in the two brothers a sight to wonder at.

'You are a little low this evening, Frederick,' said the Father of the
Marshalsea. 'Anything the matter?'

'The matter?' He stared for a moment, and then dropped his head and eyes
again. 'No, William, no. Nothing is the matter.'

'If you could be persuaded to smarten yourself up a little, Frederick--'

'Aye, aye!' said the old man hurriedly. 'But I can't be. I can't be.
Don't talk so. That's all over.'

The Father of the Marshalsea glanced at a passing Collegian with whom he
was on friendly terms, as who should say, 'An enfeebled old man, this;
but he is my brother, sir, my brother, and the voice of Nature is
potent!' and steered his brother clear of the handle of the pump by the
threadbare sleeve. Nothing would have been wanting to the perfection of
his character as a fraternal guide, philosopher and friend, if he had
only steered his brother clear of ruin, instead of bringing it upon him.

'I think, William,' said the object of his affectionate consideration,
'that I am tired, and will go home to bed.'

'My dear Frederick,' returned the other, 'don't let me detain you; don't
sacrifice your inclination to me.'

'Late hours, and a heated atmosphere, and years, I suppose,' said
Frederick, 'weaken me.'

'My dear Frederick,' returned the Father of the Marshalsea, 'do you
think you are sufficiently careful of yourself? Do you think your habits
are as precise and methodical as--shall I say as mine are? Not to revert
again to that little eccentricity which I mentioned just now, I doubt if
you take air and exercise enough, Frederick. Here is the parade, always
at your service. Why not use it more regularly than you do?'

'Hah!' sighed the other. 'Yes, yes, yes, yes.'

'But it is of no use saying yes, yes, my dear Frederick,' the Father
of the Marshalsea in his mild wisdom persisted, 'unless you act on that
assent. Consider my case, Frederick. I am a kind of example. Necessity
and time have taught me what to do. At certain stated hours of the day,
you will find me on the parade, in my room, in the Lodge, reading the
paper, receiving company, eating and drinking. I have impressed upon Amy
during many years, that I must have my meals (for instance) punctually.
Amy has grown up in a sense of the importance of these arrangements, and
you know what a good girl she is.'

The brother only sighed again, as he plodded dreamily along, 'Hah! Yes,
yes, yes, yes.'
