The dignified old gentleman turned out to be Lord Lancaster
Stiltstalking, who had been maintained by the Circumlocution Office for
many years as a representative of the Britannic Majesty abroad.
This noble Refrigerator had iced several European courts in his time,
and had done it with such complete success that the very name of
Englishman yet struck cold to the stomachs of foreigners who had the
distinguished honour of remembering him at a distance of a quarter of a
century.

He was now in retirement, and hence (in a ponderous white cravat, like
a stiff snow-drift) was so obliging as to shade the dinner. There was a
whisper of the pervading Bohemian character in the nomadic nature of
the service and its curious races of plates and dishes; but the noble
Refrigerator, infinitely better than plate or porcelain, made it superb.
He shaded the dinner, cooled the wines, chilled the gravy, and blighted
the vegetables.

There was only one other person in the room: a microscopically small
footboy, who waited on the malevolent man who hadn't got into the
Post-Office. Even this youth, if his jacket could have been unbuttoned
and his heart laid bare, would have been seen, as a distant adherent of
the Barnacle family, already to aspire to a situation under Government.

Mrs Gowan with a gentle melancholy upon her, occasioned by her son's
being reduced to court the swinish public as a follower of the low Arts,
instead of asserting his birthright and putting a ring through its nose
as an acknowledged Barnacle, headed the conversation at dinner on the
evil days. It was then that Clennam learned for the first time what
little pivots this great world goes round upon.

'If John Barnacle,' said Mrs Gowan, after the degeneracy of the times
had been fully ascertained, 'if John Barnacle had but abandoned his most
unfortunate idea of conciliating the mob, all would have been well, and
I think the country would have been preserved.'

The old lady with the high nose assented; but added that if Augustus
Stiltstalking had in a general way ordered the cavalry out with
instructions to charge, she thought the country would have been
preserved.

The noble Refrigerator assented; but added that if William Barnacle and
Tudor Stiltstalking, when they came over to one another and formed
their ever-memorable coalition, had boldly muzzled the newspapers,
and rendered it penal for any Editor-person to presume to discuss the
conduct of any appointed authority abroad or at home, he thought the
country would have been preserved.

It was agreed that the country (another word for the Barnacles and
Stiltstalkings) wanted preserving, but how it came to want preserving
was not so clear. It was only clear that the question was all about
John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking, William Barnacle and Tudor
Stiltstalking, Tom, Dick, or Harry Barnacle or Stiltstalking, because
there was nobody else but mob. And this was the feature of the
conversation which impressed Clennam, as a man not used to it, very
disagreeably: making him doubt if it were quite right to sit there,
silently hearing a great nation narrowed to such little bounds.
Remembering, however, that in the Parliamentary debates, whether on the
life of that nation's body or the life of its soul, the question was
usually all about and between John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking,
William Barnacle and Tudor Stiltstalking, Tom, Dick, or Harry Barnacle
or Stiltstalking, and nobody else; he said nothing on the part of mob,
bethinking himself that mob was used to it.

Mr Henry Gowan seemed to have a malicious pleasure in playing off the
three talkers against each other, and in seeing Clennam startled by what
they said. Having as supreme a contempt for the class that had thrown
him off as for the class that had not taken him on, he had no personal
disquiet in anything that passed. His healthy state of mind appeared
even to derive a gratification from Clennam's position of embarrassment
and isolation among the good company; and if Clennam had been in that
condition with which Nobody was incessantly contending, he would have
suspected it, and would have struggled with the suspicion as a meanness,
even while he sat at the table.

In the course of a couple of hours the noble Refrigerator, at no time
less than a hundred years behind the period, got about five centuries
in arrears, and delivered solemn political oracles appropriate to that
epoch. He finished by freezing a cup of tea for his own drinking,
and retiring at his lowest temperature.

Then Mrs Gowan, who had been accustomed in her days of a vacant
arm-chair beside her to which to summon state to retain her devoted
slaves, one by one, for short audiences as marks of her especial favour,
invited Clennam with a turn of her fan to approach the presence. He
obeyed, and took the tripod recently vacated by Lord Lancaster
Stiltstalking.

'Mr Clennam,' said Mrs Gowan, 'apart from the happiness I have in
becoming known to you, though in this odiously inconvenient place--a
mere barrack--there is a subject on which I am dying to speak to you. It
is the subject in connection with which my son first had, I believe, the
pleasure of cultivating your acquaintance.'

Clennam inclined his head, as a generally suitable reply to what he did
not yet quite understand.

'First,' said Mrs Gowan, 'now, is she really pretty?'

In nobody's difficulties, he would have found it very difficult to
answer; very difficult indeed to smile, and say 'Who?'

'Oh! You know!' she returned. 'This flame of Henry's. This unfortunate
fancy. There! If it is a point of honour that I should originate the
name--Miss Mickles--Miggles.'

'Miss Meagles,' said Clennam, 'is very beautiful.'

'Men are so often mistaken on those points,' returned Mrs Gowan, shaking
her head, 'that I candidly confess to you I feel anything but sure of
it, even now; though it is something to have Henry corroborated with so
much gravity and emphasis. He picked the people up at Rome, I think?'

The phrase would have given nobody mortal offence. Clennam replied,
'Excuse me, I doubt if I understand your expression.'

'Picked the people up,' said Mrs Gowan, tapping the sticks of her closed
fan (a large green one, which she used as a hand-screen) on her little
table. 'Came upon them. Found them out. Stumbled against them.'

'The people?'

'Yes. The Miggles people.'

'I really cannot say,' said Clennam, 'where my friend Mr Meagles first
presented Mr Henry Gowan to his daughter.'

'I am pretty sure he picked her up at Rome; but never mind
where--somewhere. Now (this is entirely between ourselves), is she very
plebeian?'

'Really, ma'am,' returned Clennam, 'I am so undoubtedly plebeian myself,
that I do not feel qualified to judge.'

'Very neat!' said Mrs Gowan, coolly unfurling her screen. 'Very happy!
From which I infer that you secretly think her manner equal to her
looks?'

Clennam, after a moment's stiffness, bowed.

'That's comforting, and I hope you may be right. Did Henry tell me you
had travelled with them?'

'I travelled with my friend Mr Meagles, and his wife and daughter,
during some months.' (Nobody's heart might have been wrung by the
remembrance.)

'Really comforting, because you must have had a large experience of
them. You see, Mr Clennam, this thing has been going on for a long time,
and I find no improvement in it. Therefore to have the opportunity of
speaking to one so well informed about it as yourself, is an immense
relief to me. Quite a boon. Quite a blessing, I am sure.'

'Pardon me,' returned Clennam, 'but I am not in Mr Henry Gowan's
confidence. I am far from being so well informed as you suppose me to
be. Your mistake makes my position a very delicate one. No word on this
topic has ever passed between Mr Henry Gowan and myself.'

Mrs Gowan glanced at the other end of the room, where her son was
playing ecarte on a sofa, with the old lady who was for a charge of
cavalry.

'Not in his confidence? No,' said Mrs Gowan. 'No word has passed between
you? No. That I can imagine. But there are unexpressed confidences, Mr
Clennam; and as you have been together intimately among these people, I
cannot doubt that a confidence of that sort exists in the present case.
Perhaps you have heard that I have suffered the keenest distress of
mind from Henry's having taken to a pursuit which--well!' shrugging her
shoulders, 'a very respectable pursuit, I dare say, and some artists
are, as artists, quite superior persons; still, we never yet in our
family have gone beyond an Amateur, and it is a pardonable weakness to
feel a little--'

As Mrs Gowan broke off to heave a sigh, Clennam, however resolute to
be magnanimous, could not keep down the thought that there was mighty
little danger of the family's ever going beyond an Amateur, even as it
was.

'Henry,' the mother resumed, 'is self-willed and resolute; and as these
people naturally strain every nerve to catch him, I can entertain very
little hope, Mr Clennam, that the thing will be broken off. I apprehend
the girl's fortune will be very small; Henry might have done much
better; there is scarcely anything to compensate for the connection:
still, he acts for himself; and if I find no improvement within a short
time, I see no other course than to resign myself and make the best of
these people. I am infinitely obliged to you for what you have told
me.'

As she shrugged her shoulders, Clennam stiffly bowed again. With an
uneasy flush upon his face, and hesitation in his manner, he then said
in a still lower tone than he had adopted yet:

'Mrs Gowan, I scarcely know how to acquit myself of what I feel to be a
duty, and yet I must ask you for your kind consideration in
attempting to discharge it. A misconception on your part, a very great
misconception if I may venture to call it so, seems to require setting
right. You have supposed Mr Meagles and his family to strain every
nerve, I think you said--'

'Every nerve,' repeated Mrs Gowan, looking at him in calm obstinacy,
with her green fan between her face and the fire.

'To secure Mr Henry Gowan?'

The lady placidly assented.

'Now that is so far,' said Arthur, 'from being the case, that I know
Mr Meagles to be unhappy in this matter; and to have interposed all
reasonable obstacles with the hope of putting an end to it.'

Mrs Gowan shut up her great green fan, tapped him on the arm with it,
and tapped her smiling lips. 'Why, of course,' said she. 'Just what I
mean.'

Arthur watched her face for some explanation of what she did mean.

'Are you really serious, Mr Clennam? Don't you see?'

Arthur did not see; and said so.

'Why, don't I know my son, and don't I know that this is exactly the way
to hold him?' said Mrs Gowan, contemptuously; 'and do not these Miggles
people know it, at least as well as I? Oh, shrewd people, Mr Clennam:
evidently people of business! I believe Miggles belonged to a Bank. It
ought to have been a very profitable Bank, if he had much to do with its
management. This is very well done, indeed.'

'I beg and entreat you, ma'am--' Arthur interposed.

'Oh, Mr Clennam, can you really be so credulous?'

It made such a painful impression upon him to hear her talking in this
haughty tone, and to see her patting her contemptuous lips with her
fan, that he said very earnestly, 'Believe me, ma'am, this is unjust, a
perfectly groundless suspicion.'

'Suspicion?' repeated Mrs Gowan. 'Not suspicion, Mr Clennam, Certainty.
It is very knowingly done indeed, and seems to have taken _you_ in
completely.' She laughed; and again sat tapping her lips with her fan,
and tossing her head, as if she added, 'Don't tell me. I know such
people will do anything for the honour of such an alliance.'

At this opportune moment, the cards were thrown up, and Mr Henry Gowan
came across the room saying, 'Mother, if you can spare Mr Clennam for
this time, we have a long way to go, and it's getting late.' Mr Clennam
thereupon rose, as he had no choice but to do; and Mrs Gowan showed him,
to the last, the same look and the same tapped contemptuous lips.

'You have had a portentously long audience of my mother,' said Gowan, as
the door closed upon them. 'I fervently hope she has not bored you?'

'Not at all,' said Clennam.

They had a little open phaeton for the journey, and were soon in it on
the road home. Gowan, driving, lighted a cigar; Clennam declined one. Do
what he would, he fell into such a mood of abstraction that Gowan said
again, 'I am very much afraid my mother has bored you?' To which he
roused himself to answer, 'Not at all!' and soon relapsed again.

In that state of mind which rendered nobody uneasy, his thoughtfulness
would have turned principally on the man at his side. He would have
thought of the morning when he first saw him rooting out the stones with
his heel, and would have asked himself, 'Does he jerk me out of the
path in the same careless, cruel way?' He would have thought, had this
introduction to his mother been brought about by him because he knew
what she would say, and that he could thus place his position before
a rival and loftily warn him off, without himself reposing a word of
confidence in him? He would have thought, even if there were no such
design as that, had he brought him there to play with his repressed
emotions, and torment him? The current of these meditations would have
been stayed sometimes by a rush of shame, bearing a remonstrance to
himself from his own open nature, representing that to shelter such
suspicions, even for the passing moment, was not to hold the high,
unenvious course he had resolved to keep. At those times, the striving
within him would have been hardest; and looking up and catching Gowan's
eyes, he would have started as if he had done him an injury.

Then, looking at the dark road and its uncertain objects, he would have
gradually trailed off again into thinking, 'Where are we driving, he
and I, I wonder, on the darker road of life? How will it be with us, and
with her, in the obscure distance?' Thinking of her, he would have been
troubled anew with a reproachful misgiving that it was not even loyal to
her to dislike him, and that in being so easily prejudiced against him
he was less deserving of her than at first.

'You are evidently out of spirits,' said Gowan; 'I am very much afraid
my mother must have bored you dreadfully.'

'Believe me, not at all,' said Clennam. 'It's nothing--nothing!'




CHAPTER 27. Five-and-Twenty

A frequently recurring doubt, whether Mr Pancks's desire to collect
information relative to the Dorrit family could have any possible
bearing on the misgivings he had imparted to his mother on his return
from his long exile, caused Arthur Clennam much uneasiness at this
period. What Mr Pancks already knew about the Dorrit family, what more
he really wanted to find out, and why he should trouble his busy head
about them at all, were questions that often perplexed him. Mr Pancks
was not a man to waste his time and trouble in researches prompted by
idle curiosity. That he had a specific object Clennam could not doubt.
And whether the attainment of that object by Mr Pancks's industry might
bring to light, in some untimely way, secret reasons which had induced
his mother to take Little Dorrit by the hand, was a serious speculation.

Not that he ever wavered either in his desire or his determination to
repair a wrong that had been done in his father's time, should a
wrong come to light, and be reparable. The shadow of a supposed act
of injustice, which had hung over him since his father's death, was
so vague and formless that it might be the result of a reality widely
remote from his idea of it. But, if his apprehensions should prove to
be well founded, he was ready at any moment to lay down all he had, and
begin the world anew. As the fierce dark teaching of his childhood had
never sunk into his heart, so that first article in his code of morals
was, that he must begin, in practical humility, with looking well to
his feet on Earth, and that he could never mount on wings of words to
Heaven. Duty on earth, restitution on earth, action on earth; these
first, as the first steep steps upward. Strait was the gate and narrow
was the way; far straiter and narrower than the broad high road paved
with vain professions and vain repetitions, motes from other men's eyes
and liberal delivery of others to the judgment--all cheap materials
costing absolutely nothing.

No. It was not a selfish fear or hesitation that rendered him
uneasy, but a mistrust lest Pancks might not observe his part of the
understanding between them, and, making any discovery, might take some
course upon it without imparting it to him. On the other hand, when he
recalled his conversation with Pancks, and the little reason he had to
suppose that there was any likelihood of that strange personage being
on that track at all, there were times when he wondered that he made so
much of it. Labouring in this sea, as all barks labour in cross seas, he
tossed about and came to no haven.

The removal of Little Dorrit herself from their customary association,
did not mend the matter. She was so much out, and so much in her own
room, that he began to miss her and to find a blank in her place. He had
written to her to inquire if she were better, and she had written
back, very gratefully and earnestly telling him not to be uneasy on her
behalf, for she was quite well; but he had not seen her, for what, in
their intercourse, was a long time.

He returned home one evening from an interview with her father, who had
mentioned that she was out visiting--which was what he always said
when she was hard at work to buy his supper--and found Mr Meagles in an
excited state walking up and down his room. On his opening the door, Mr
Meagles stopped, faced round, and said:

'Clennam!--Tattycoram!'

'What's the matter?'

'Lost!'

'Why, bless my heart alive!' cried Clennam in amazement. 'What do you
mean?'

'Wouldn't count five-and-twenty, sir; couldn't be got to do it; stopped
at eight, and took herself off.'

'Left your house?'

'Never to come back,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head. 'You don't know
that girl's passionate and proud character. A team of horses couldn't
draw her back now; the bolts and bars of the old Bastille couldn't keep
her.'

'How did it happen? Pray sit down and tell me.'

'As to how it happened, it's not so easy to relate: because you must
have the unfortunate temperament of the poor impetuous girl herself,
before you can fully understand it. But it came about in this way. Pet
and Mother and I have been having a good deal of talk together of late.
I'll not disguise from you, Clennam, that those conversations have not
been of as bright a kind as I could wish; they have referred to our
going away again. In proposing to do which, I have had, in fact, an
object.'

Nobody's heart beat quickly.

'An object,' said Mr Meagles, after a moment's pause, 'that I will not
disguise from you, either, Clennam. There's an inclination on the part
of my dear child which I am sorry for. Perhaps you guess the person.
Henry Gowan.'

'I was not unprepared to hear it.'

'Well!' said Mr Meagles, with a heavy sigh, 'I wish to God you had never
had to hear it. However, so it is. Mother and I have done all we could
to get the better of it, Clennam. We have tried tender advice, we
have tried time, we have tried absence. As yet, of no use. Our late
conversations have been upon the subject of going away for another year
at least, in order that there might be an entire separation and breaking
off for that term. Upon that question, Pet has been unhappy, and
therefore Mother and I have been unhappy.'

Clennam said that he could easily believe it.

'Well!' continued Mr Meagles in an apologetic way, 'I admit as a
practical man, and I am sure Mother would admit as a practical woman,
that we do, in families, magnify our troubles and make mountains of our
molehills in a way that is calculated to be rather trying to people who
look on--to mere outsiders, you know, Clennam. Still, Pet's happiness
or unhappiness is quite a life or death question with us; and we may be
excused, I hope, for making much of it. At all events, it might have
been borne by Tattycoram. Now, don't you think so?'

'I do indeed think so,' returned Clennam, in most emphatic recognition
of this very moderate expectation.

'No, sir,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head ruefully. 'She couldn't
stand it. The chafing and firing of that girl, the wearing and tearing
of that girl within her own breast, has been such that I have
softly said to her again and again in passing her, "Five-and-twenty,
Tattycoram, five-and-twenty!" I heartily wish she could have gone
on counting five-and-twenty day and night, and then it wouldn't have
happened.'

Mr Meagles with a despondent countenance in which the goodness of his
heart was even more expressed than in his times of cheerfulness and
gaiety, stroked his face down from his forehead to his chin, and shook
his head again.

'I said to Mother (not that it was necessary, for she would have thought
it all for herself), we are practical people, my dear, and we know her
story; we see in this unhappy girl some reflection of what was raging in
her mother's heart before ever such a creature as this poor thing was
in the world; we'll gloss her temper over, Mother, we won't notice it at
present, my dear, we'll take advantage of some better disposition in her
another time. So we said nothing. But, do what we would, it seems as if
it was to be; she broke out violently one night.'

'How, and why?'

'If you ask me Why,' said Mr Meagles, a little disturbed by the
question, for he was far more intent on softening her case than the
family's, 'I can only refer you to what I have just repeated as having
been pretty near my words to Mother. As to How, we had said Good night
to Pet in her presence (very affectionately, I must allow), and she
had attended Pet up-stairs--you remember she was her maid. Perhaps Pet,
having been out of sorts, may have been a little more inconsiderate than
usual in requiring services of her: but I don't know that I have any
right to say so; she was always thoughtful and gentle.'

'The gentlest mistress in the world.'

'Thank you, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, shaking him by the hand; 'you
have often seen them together. Well! We presently heard this unfortunate
Tattycoram loud and angry, and before we could ask what was the matter,
Pet came back in a tremble, saying she was frightened of her. Close
after her came Tattycoram in a flaming rage. "I hate you all three,"
says she, stamping her foot at us. "I am bursting with hate of the whole
house."'

'Upon which you--?'

'I?' said Mr Meagles, with a plain good faith that might have commanded
the belief of Mrs Gowan herself. 'I said, count five-and-twenty,
Tattycoram.'

Mr Meagles again stroked his face and shook his head, with an air of
profound regret.

'She was so used to do it, Clennam, that even then, such a picture of
passion as you never saw, she stopped short, looked me full in the face,
and counted (as I made out) to eight. But she couldn't control herself
to go any further. There she broke down, poor thing, and gave the other
seventeen to the four winds. Then it all burst out. She detested us, she
was miserable with us, she couldn't bear it, she wouldn't bear it, she
was determined to go away. She was younger than her young mistress, and
would she remain to see her always held up as the only creature who was
young and interesting, and to be cherished and loved? No. She wouldn't,
she wouldn't, she wouldn't! What did we think she, Tattycoram, might
have been if she had been caressed and cared for in her childhood, like
her young mistress? As good as her? Ah! Perhaps fifty times as good.
When we pretended to be so fond of one another, we exulted over her;
that was what we did; we exulted over her and shamed her. And all in
the house did the same. They talked about their fathers and mothers, and
brothers and sisters; they liked to drag them up before her face. There
was Mrs Tickit, only yesterday, when her little grandchild was with her,
had been amused by the child's trying to call her (Tattycoram) by the
wretched name we gave her; and had laughed at the name. Why, who didn't;
and who were we that we should have a right to name her like a dog or a
cat? But she didn't care. She would take no more benefits from us; she
would fling us her name back again, and she would go. She would leave
us that minute, nobody should stop her, and we should never hear of her
again.'

Mr Meagles had recited all this with such a vivid remembrance of his
original, that he was almost as flushed and hot by this time as he
described her to have been.

'Ah, well!' he said, wiping his face. 'It was of no use trying reason
then, with that vehement panting creature (Heaven knows what her
mother's story must have been); so I quietly told her that she should
not go at that late hour of night, and I gave her my hand and took her
to her room, and locked the house doors. But she was gone this morning.'

'And you know no more of her?'

'No more,' returned Mr Meagles. 'I have been hunting about all day. She
must have gone very early and very silently. I have found no trace of
her down about us.'

'Stay! You want,' said Clennam, after a moment's reflection, 'to see
her? I assume that?'

'Yes, assuredly; I want to give her another chance; Mother and Pet
want to give her another chance; come! You yourself,' said Mr Meagles,
persuasively, as if the provocation to be angry were not his own at all,
'want to give the poor passionate girl another chance, I know, Clennam.'

'It would be strange and hard indeed if I did not,' said Clennam, 'when
you are all so forgiving. What I was going to ask you was, have you
thought of that Miss Wade?'

'I have. I did not think of her until I had pervaded the whole of our
neighbourhood, and I don't know that I should have done so then but
for finding Mother and Pet, when I went home, full of the idea that
Tattycoram must have gone to her. Then, of course, I recalled what she
said that day at dinner when you were first with us.'

'Have you any idea where Miss Wade is to be found?'

'To tell you the truth,' returned Mr Meagles, 'it's because I have an
addled jumble of a notion on that subject that you found me waiting
here. There is one of those odd impressions in my house, which do
mysteriously get into houses sometimes, which nobody seems to have
picked up in a distinct form from anybody, and yet which everybody seems
to have got hold of loosely from somebody and let go again, that she
lives, or was living, thereabouts.' Mr Meagles handed him a slip of
paper, on which was written the name of one of the dull by-streets in
the Grosvenor region, near Park Lane.

'Here is no number,' said Arthur looking over it.

'No number, my dear Clennam?' returned his friend. 'No anything! The
very name of the street may have been floating in the air; for, as I
tell you, none of my people can say where they got it from. However,
it's worth an inquiry; and as I would rather make it in company than
alone, and as you too were a fellow-traveller of that immovable woman's,
I thought perhaps--' Clennam finished the sentence for him by taking up
his hat again, and saying he was ready.

It was now summer-time; a grey, hot, dusty evening. They rode to the top
of Oxford Street, and there alighting, dived in among the great streets
of melancholy stateliness, and the little streets that try to be as
stately and succeed in being more melancholy, of which there is a
labyrinth near Park Lane. Wildernesses of corner houses, with barbarous
old porticoes and appurtenances; horrors that came into existence under
some wrong-headed person in some wrong-headed time, still demanding
the blind admiration of all ensuing generations and determined to do
so until they tumbled down; frowned upon the twilight. Parasite little
tenements, with the cramp in their whole frame, from the dwarf hall-door
on the giant model of His Grace's in the Square to the squeezed window
of the boudoir commanding the dunghills in the Mews, made the evening
doleful. Rickety dwellings of undoubted fashion, but of a capacity to
hold nothing comfortably except a dismal smell, looked like the last
result of the great mansions' breeding in-and-in; and, where their
little supplementary bows and balconies were supported on thin iron
columns, seemed to be scrofulously resting upon crutches. Here and
there a Hatchment, with the whole science of Heraldry in it, loomed down
upon the street, like an Archbishop discoursing on Vanity. The shops,
few in number, made no show; for popular opinion was as nothing to them.
The pastrycook knew who was on his books, and in that knowledge could be
calm, with a few glass cylinders of dowager peppermint-drops in his
window, and half-a-dozen ancient specimens of currant-jelly. A few
oranges formed the greengrocer's whole concession to the vulgar mind. A
single basket made of moss, once containing plovers' eggs, held all that
the poulterer had to say to the rabble. Everybody in those streets
seemed (which is always the case at that hour and season) to be gone out
to dinner, and nobody seemed to be giving the dinners they had gone to.
On the doorsteps there were lounging footmen with bright parti-coloured
plumage and white polls, like an extinct race of monstrous birds; and
butlers, solitary men of recluse demeanour, each of whom appeared
distrustful of all other butlers. The roll of carriages in the Park was
done for the day; the street lamps were lighting; and wicked little
grooms in the tightest fitting garments, with twists in their legs
answering to the twists in their minds, hung about in pairs, chewing
straws and exchanging fraudulent secrets. The spotted dogs who went out
with the carriages, and who were so associated with splendid equipages
that it looked like a condescension in those animals to come out without
them, accompanied helpers to and fro on messages. Here and there was a
retiring public-house which did not require to be supported on the
shoulders of the people, and where gentlemen out of livery were not much
wanted.

This last discovery was made by the two friends in pursuing their
inquiries. Nothing was there, or anywhere, known of such a person as
Miss Wade, in connection with the street they sought. It was one of the
parasite streets; long, regular, narrow, dull and gloomy; like a brick
and mortar funeral. They inquired at several little area gates, where
a dejected youth stood spiking his chin on the summit of a precipitous
little shoot of wooden steps, but could gain no information. They walked
up the street on one side of the way, and down it on the other, what
time two vociferous news-sellers, announcing an extraordinary event that
had never happened and never would happen, pitched their hoarse voices
into the secret chambers; but nothing came of it. At length they stood
at the corner from which they had begun, and it had fallen quite dark,
and they were no wiser.

It happened that in the street they had several times passed a dingy
house, apparently empty, with bills in the windows, announcing that it
was to let. The bills, as a variety in the funeral procession, almost
amounted to a decoration. Perhaps because they kept the house separated
in his mind, or perhaps because Mr Meagles and himself had twice agreed
in passing, 'It is clear she don't live there,' Clennam now proposed
that they should go back and try that house before finally going away.
Mr Meagles agreed, and back they went.

They knocked once, and they rang once, without any response. 'Empty,'
said Mr Meagles, listening. 'Once more,' said Clennam, and knocked
again. After that knock they heard a movement below, and somebody
shuffling up towards the door.

The confined entrance was so dark that it was impossible to make out
distinctly what kind of person opened the door; but it appeared to be an
old woman. 'Excuse our troubling you,' said Clennam. 'Pray can you
tell us where Miss Wade lives?' The voice in the darkness unexpectedly
replied, 'Lives here.'

'Is she at home?'

No answer coming, Mr Meagles asked again. 'Pray is she at home?'

After another delay, 'I suppose she is,' said the voice abruptly; 'you
had better come in, and I'll ask.'

They were summarily shut into the close black house; and the figure
rustling away, and speaking from a higher level, said, 'Come up, if you
please; you can't tumble over anything.' They groped their way up-stairs
towards a faint light, which proved to be the light of the street
shining through a window; and the figure left them shut in an airless
room.

'This is odd, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, softly.

'Odd enough,' assented Clennam in the same tone, 'but we have succeeded;
that's the main point. Here's a light coming!'

The light was a lamp, and the bearer was an old woman: very dirty, very
wrinkled and dry. 'She's at home,' she said (and the voice was the same
that had spoken before); 'she'll come directly.' Having set the lamp
down on the table, the old woman dusted her hands on her apron, which
she might have done for ever without cleaning them, looked at the
visitors with a dim pair of eyes, and backed out.

The lady whom they had come to see, if she were the present occupant
of the house, appeared to have taken up her quarters there as she might
have established herself in an Eastern caravanserai. A small square
of carpet in the middle of the room, a few articles of furniture that
evidently did not belong to the room, and a disorder of trunks and
travelling articles, formed the whole of her surroundings. Under some
former regular inhabitant, the stifling little apartment had broken out
into a pier-glass and a gilt table; but the gilding was as faded as last
year's flowers, and the glass was so clouded that it seemed to hold in
magic preservation all the fogs and bad weather it had ever reflected.
The visitors had had a minute or two to look about them, when the door
opened and Miss Wade came in.

She was exactly the same as when they had parted, just as handsome, just
as scornful, just as repressed. She manifested no surprise in seeing
them, nor any other emotion. She requested them to be seated; and
declining to take a seat herself, at once anticipated any introduction
of their business.

'I apprehend,' she said, 'that I know the cause of your favouring me
with this visit. We may come to it at once.'

'The cause then, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'is Tattycoram.'

'So I supposed.'

'Miss Wade,' said Mr Meagles, 'will you be so kind as to say whether you
know anything of her?'

'Surely. I know she is here with me.'

'Then, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'allow me to make known to you that I
shall be happy to have her back, and that my wife and daughter will
be happy to have her back. She has been with us a long time: we don't
forget her claims upon us, and I hope we know how to make allowances.'

'You hope to know how to make allowances?' she returned, in a level,
measured voice. 'For what?'

'I think my friend would say, Miss Wade,' Arthur Clennam interposed,
seeing Mr Meagles rather at a loss, 'for the passionate sense that
sometimes comes upon the poor girl, of being at a disadvantage. Which
occasionally gets the better of better remembrances.'

The lady broke into a smile as she turned her eyes upon him. 'Indeed?'
was all she answered.

She stood by the table so perfectly composed and still after this
acknowledgment of his remark that Mr Meagles stared at her under a sort
of fascination, and could not even look to Clennam to make another move.
After waiting, awkwardly enough, for some moments, Arthur said:

'Perhaps it would be well if Mr Meagles could see her, Miss Wade?'

'That is easily done,' said she. 'Come here, child.' She had opened a
door while saying this, and now led the girl in by the hand. It was
very curious to see them standing together: the girl with her disengaged
fingers plaiting the bosom of her dress, half irresolutely, half
passionately; Miss Wade with her composed face attentively regarding
her, and suggesting to an observer, with extraordinary force, in her
composure itself (as a veil will suggest the form it covers), the
unquenchable passion of her own nature.

'See here,' she said, in the same level way as before. 'Here is your
patron, your master. He is willing to take you back, my dear, if you are
sensible of the favour and choose to go. You can be, again, a foil to
his pretty daughter, a slave to her pleasant wilfulness, and a toy in
the house showing the goodness of the family. You can have your droll
name again, playfully pointing you out and setting you apart, as it is
right that you should be pointed out and set apart. (Your birth, you
know; you must not forget your birth.) You can again be shown to this
gentleman's daughter, Harriet, and kept before her, as a living reminder
of her own superiority and her gracious condescension. You can recover
all these advantages and many more of the same kind which I dare say
start up in your memory while I speak, and which you lose in taking
refuge with me--you can recover them all by telling these gentlemen how
humbled and penitent you are, and by going back to them to be forgiven.
What do you say, Harriet? Will you go?'

The girl who, under the influence of these words, had gradually risen
in anger and heightened in colour, answered, raising her lustrous black
eyes for the moment, and clenching her hand upon the folds it had been
puckering up, 'I'd die sooner!'

Miss Wade, still standing at her side holding her hand, looked quietly
round and said with a smile, 'Gentlemen! What do you do upon that?'

Poor Mr Meagles's inexpressible consternation in hearing his motives and
actions so perverted, had prevented him from interposing any word until
now; but now he regained the power of speech.

'Tattycoram,' said he, 'for I'll call you by that name still, my good
girl, conscious that I meant nothing but kindness when I gave it to you,
and conscious that you know it--'

'I don't!' said she, looking up again, and almost rending herself with
the same busy hand.

'No, not now, perhaps,' said Mr Meagles; 'not with that lady's eyes so
intent upon you, Tattycoram,' she glanced at them for a moment, 'and
that power over you, which we see she exercises; not now, perhaps, but
at another time. Tattycoram, I'll not ask that lady whether she believes
what she has said, even in the anger and ill blood in which I and my
friend here equally know she has spoken, though she subdues herself,
with a determination that any one who has once seen her is not likely
to forget. I'll not ask you, with your remembrance of my house and all
belonging to it, whether you believe it. I'll only say that you have
no profession to make to me or mine, and no forgiveness to entreat;
and that all in the world that I ask you to do, is, to count
five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

She looked at him for an instant, and then said frowningly, 'I won't.
Miss Wade, take me away, please.'

The contention that raged within her had no softening in it now; it
was wholly between passionate defiance and stubborn defiance. Her rich
colour, her quick blood, her rapid breath, were all setting themselves
against the opportunity of retracing their steps. 'I won't. I won't.
I won't!' she repeated in a low, thick voice. 'I'd be torn to pieces
first. I'd tear myself to pieces first!'

Miss Wade, who had released her hold, laid her hand protectingly on the
girl's neck for a moment, and then said, looking round with her former
smile and speaking exactly in her former tone, 'Gentlemen! What do you
do upon that?'

'Oh, Tattycoram, Tattycoram!' cried Mr Meagles, adjuring her besides
with an earnest hand. 'Hear that lady's voice, look at that lady's face,
consider what is in that lady's heart, and think what a future lies
before you. My child, whatever you may think, that lady's influence
over you--astonishing to us, and I should hardly go too far in saying
terrible to us to see--is founded in passion fiercer than yours, and
temper more violent than yours. What can you two be together? What can
come of it?'

'I am alone here, gentlemen,' observed Miss Wade, with no change of
voice or manner. 'Say anything you will.'

'Politeness must yield to this misguided girl, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles,
'at her present pass; though I hope not altogether to dismiss it,
even with the injury you do her so strongly before me. Excuse me for
reminding you in her hearing--I must say it--that you were a mystery
to all of us, and had nothing in common with any of us when she
unfortunately fell in your way. I don't know what you are, but you don't
hide, can't hide, what a dark spirit you have within you. If it should
happen that you are a woman, who, from whatever cause, has a perverted
delight in making a sister-woman as wretched as she is (I am old enough
to have heard of such), I warn her against you, and I warn you against
yourself.'

'Gentlemen!' said Miss Wade, calmly. 'When you have concluded--Mr
Clennam, perhaps you will induce your friend--'

'Not without another effort,' said Mr Meagles, stoutly. 'Tattycoram,
my poor dear girl, count five-and-twenty.'

'Do not reject the hope, the certainty, this kind man offers you,' said
Clennam in a low emphatic voice. 'Turn to the friends you have not
forgotten. Think once more!'

'I won't! Miss Wade,' said the girl, with her bosom swelling high, and
speaking with her hand held to her throat, 'take me away!'

'Tattycoram,' said Mr Meagles. 'Once more yet! The only thing I ask of
you in the world, my child! Count five-and-twenty!'

She put her hands tightly over her ears, confusedly tumbling down her
bright black hair in the vehemence of the action, and turned her face
resolutely to the wall. Miss Wade, who had watched her under this final
appeal with that strange attentive smile, and that repressing hand
upon her own bosom with which she had watched her in her struggle at
Marseilles, then put her arm about her waist as if she took possession
of her for evermore.

And there was a visible triumph in her face when she turned it to
dismiss the visitors.

'As it is the last time I shall have the honour,' she said, 'and as you
have spoken of not knowing what I am, and also of the foundation of my
influence here, you may now know that it is founded in a common cause.
What your broken plaything is as to birth, I am. She has no name, I have
no name. Her wrong is my wrong. I have nothing more to say to you.'

This was addressed to Mr Meagles, who sorrowfully went out. As Clennam
followed, she said to him, with the same external composure and in the
same level voice, but with a smile that is only seen on cruel faces: a
very faint smile, lifting the nostril, scarcely touching the lips, and
not breaking away gradually, but instantly dismissed when done with:

'I hope the wife of your dear friend Mr Gowan, may be happy in the
contrast of her extraction to this girl's and mine, and in the high good
fortune that awaits her.'




CHAPTER 28. Nobody's Disappearance


Not resting satisfied with the endeavours he had made to recover his
lost charge, Mr Meagles addressed a letter of remonstrance, breathing
nothing but goodwill, not only to her, but to Miss Wade too. No answer
coming to these epistles, or to another written to the stubborn girl
by the hand of her late young mistress, which might have melted her
if anything could (all three letters were returned weeks afterwards as
having been refused at the house-door), he deputed Mrs Meagles to make
the experiment of a personal interview. That worthy lady being unable to
obtain one, and being steadfastly denied admission, Mr Meagles besought
Arthur to essay once more what he could do. All that came of his
compliance was, his discovery that the empty house was left in charge
of the old woman, that Miss Wade was gone, that the waifs and strays of
furniture were gone, and that the old woman would accept any number of
half-crowns and thank the donor kindly, but had no information whatever
to exchange for those coins, beyond constantly offering for perusal a
memorandum relative to fixtures, which the house-agent's young man had
left in the hall.

Unwilling, even under this discomfiture, to resign the ingrate and leave
her hopeless, in case of her better dispositions obtaining the mastery
over the darker side of her character, Mr Meagles, for six successive
days, published a discreetly covert advertisement in the morning papers,
to the effect that if a certain young person who had lately left
home without reflection, would at any time apply to his address at
Twickenham, everything would be as it had been before, and no reproaches
need be apprehended. The unexpected consequences of this notification
suggested to the dismayed Mr Meagles for the first time that some
hundreds of young persons must be leaving their homes without reflection
every day; for shoals of wrong young people came down to Twickenham,
who, not finding themselves received with enthusiasm, generally demanded
compensation by way of damages, in addition to coach-hire there and
back. Nor were these the only uninvited clients whom the advertisement
produced. The swarm of begging-letter writers, who would seem to be
always watching eagerly for any hook, however small, to hang a letter
upon, wrote to say that having seen the advertisement, they were induced
to apply with confidence for various sums, ranging from ten shillings to
fifty pounds: not because they knew anything about the young person,
but because they felt that to part with those donations would greatly
relieve the advertiser's mind. Several projectors, likewise, availed
themselves of the same opportunity to correspond with Mr Meagles; as,
for example, to apprise him that their attention having been called to
the advertisement by a friend, they begged to state that if they should
ever hear anything of the young person, they would not fail to make it
known to him immediately, and that in the meantime if he would oblige
them with the funds necessary for bringing to perfection a certain
entirely novel description of Pump, the happiest results would ensue to
mankind.

Mr Meagles and his family, under these combined discouragements, had
begun reluctantly to give up Tattycoram as irrecoverable, when the new
and active firm of Doyce and Clennam, in their private capacities,
went down on a Saturday to stay at the cottage until Monday. The senior
partner took the coach, and the junior partner took his walking-stick.

A tranquil summer sunset shone upon him as he approached the end of
his walk, and passed through the meadows by the river side. He had
that sense of peace, and of being lightened of a weight of care, which
country quiet awakens in the breasts of dwellers in towns. Everything
within his view was lovely and placid. The rich foliage of the trees,
the luxuriant grass diversified with wild flowers, the little green
islands in the river, the beds of rushes, the water-lilies floating on
the surface of the stream, the distant voices in boats borne musically
towards him on the ripple of the water and the evening air, were all
expressive of rest. In the occasional leap of a fish, or dip of an oar,
or twittering of a bird not yet at roost, or distant barking of a dog,
or lowing of a cow--in all such sounds, there was the prevailing breath
of rest, which seemed to encompass him in every scent that sweetened
the fragrant air. The long lines of red and gold in the sky, and the
glorious track of the descending sun, were all divinely calm. Upon the
purple tree-tops far away, and on the green height near at hand up which
the shades were slowly creeping, there was an equal hush. Between the
real landscape and its shadow in the water, there was no division; both
were so untroubled and clear, and, while so fraught with solemn mystery
of life and death, so hopefully reassuring to the gazer's soothed heart,
because so tenderly and mercifully beautiful.

Clennam had stopped, not for the first time by many times, to look about
him and suffer what he saw to sink into his soul, as the shadows, looked
at, seemed to sink deeper and deeper into the water. He was slowly
resuming his way, when he saw a figure in the path before him which he
had, perhaps, already associated with the evening and its impressions.

Minnie was there, alone. She had some roses in her hand, and seemed to
have stood still on seeing him, waiting for him. Her face was towards
him, and she appeared to have been coming from the opposite direction.
There was a flutter in her manner, which Clennam had never seen in it
before; and as he came near her, it entered his mind all at once that
she was there of a set purpose to speak to him.

She gave him her hand, and said, 'You wonder to see me here by myself?
But the evening is so lovely, I have strolled further than I meant
at first. I thought it likely I might meet you, and that made me more
confident. You always come this way, do you not?'

As Clennam said that it was his favourite way, he felt her hand falter
on his arm, and saw the roses shake.

'Will you let me give you one, Mr Clennam? I gathered them as I came out
of the garden. Indeed, I almost gathered them for you, thinking it so
likely I might meet you. Mr Doyce arrived more than an hour ago, and
told us you were walking down.'

His own hand shook, as he accepted a rose or two from hers and thanked
her. They were now by an avenue of trees. Whether they turned into it on
his movement or on hers matters little. He never knew how that was.

'It is very grave here,' said Clennam, 'but very pleasant at this hour.
Passing along this deep shade, and out at that arch of light at the
other end, we come upon the ferry and the cottage by the best approach,
I think.'

In her simple garden-hat and her light summer dress, with her rich brown
hair naturally clustering about her, and her wonderful eyes raised to
his for a moment with a look in which regard for him and trustfulness in
him were strikingly blended with a kind of timid sorrow for him, she was
so beautiful that it was well for his peace--or ill for his peace, he
did not quite know which--that he had made that vigorous resolution he
had so often thought about.

She broke a momentary silence by inquiring if he knew that papa had been
thinking of another tour abroad? He said he had heard it mentioned. She
broke another momentary silence by adding, with some hesitation, that
papa had abandoned the idea.

At this, he thought directly, 'they are to be married.'

'Mr Clennam,' she said, hesitating more timidly yet, and speaking so low
that he bent his head to hear her. 'I should very much like to give you
my confidence, if you would not mind having the goodness to receive
it. I should have very much liked to have given it to you long ago,
because--I felt that you were becoming so much our friend.'

'How can I be otherwise than proud of it at any time! Pray give it to
me. Pray trust me.'

'I could never have been afraid of trusting you,' she returned, raising
her eyes frankly to his face. 'I think I would have done so some time
ago, if I had known how. But I scarcely know how, even now.'

'Mr Gowan,' said Arthur Clennam, 'has reason to be very happy. God bless
his wife and him!'

She wept, as she tried to thank him. He reassured her, took her hand
as it lay with the trembling roses in it on his arm, took the remaining
roses from it, and put it to his lips. At that time, it seemed to him,
he first finally resigned the dying hope that had flickered in nobody's
heart so much to its pain and trouble; and from that time he became in
his own eyes, as to any similar hope or prospect, a very much older man
who had done with that part of life.

He put the roses in his breast and they walked on for a little while,
slowly and silently, under the umbrageous trees. Then he asked her, in
a voice of cheerful kindness, was there anything else that she would
