tired. Stay a bit. I'll get some cushions out of the church, and you and
your friend shall lie down before the fire. Don't be afraid of not
going in to join your father when the gate opens. _I'll_ call you.'

He soon brought in the cushions, and strewed them on the ground.

'There you are, you see. Again as large as life. Oh, never mind
thanking. I've daughters of my own. And though they weren't born in the
Marshalsea Prison, they might have been, if I had been, in my ways of
carrying on, of your father's breed. Stop a bit. I must put something
under the cushion for your head. Here's a burial volume, just the
thing! We have got Mrs Bangham in this book. But what makes these books
interesting to most people is--not who's in 'em, but who isn't--who's
coming, you know, and when. That's the interesting question.'

Commendingly looking back at the pillow he had improvised, he left them
to their hour's repose. Maggy was snoring already, and Little Dorrit
was soon fast asleep with her head resting on that sealed book of Fate,
untroubled by its mysterious blank leaves.

This was Little Dorrit's party. The shame, desertion, wretchedness, and
exposure of the great capital; the wet, the cold, the slow hours, and
the swift clouds of the dismal night. This was the party from which
Little Dorrit went home, jaded, in the first grey mist of a rainy
morning.




CHAPTER 15. Mrs Flintwinch has another Dream


The debilitated old house in the city, wrapped in its mantle of soot,
and leaning heavily on the crutches that had partaken of its decay and
worn out with it, never knew a healthy or a cheerful interval, let what
would betide. If the sun ever touched it, it was but with a ray, and
that was gone in half an hour; if the moonlight ever fell upon it, it
was only to put a few patches on its doleful cloak, and make it look
more wretched. The stars, to be sure, coldly watched it when the nights
and the smoke were clear enough; and all bad weather stood by it with
a rare fidelity. You should alike find rain, hail, frost, and thaw
lingering in that dismal enclosure when they had vanished from other
places; and as to snow, you should see it there for weeks, long after
it had changed from yellow to black, slowly weeping away its grimy life.
The place had no other adherents. As to street noises, the rumbling of
wheels in the lane merely rushed in at the gateway in going past, and
rushed out again: making the listening Mistress Affery feel as if she
were deaf, and recovered the sense of hearing by instantaneous flashes.
So with whistling, singing, talking, laughing, and all pleasant human
sounds. They leaped the gap in a moment, and went upon their way.

The varying light of fire and candle in Mrs Clennam's room made the
greatest change that ever broke the dead monotony of the spot. In her
two long narrow windows, the fire shone sullenly all day, and sullenly
all night. On rare occasions it flashed up passionately, as she did;
but for the most part it was suppressed, like her, and preyed upon
itself evenly and slowly. During many hours of the short winter days,
however, when it was dusk there early in the afternoon, changing
distortions of herself in her wheeled chair, of Mr Flintwinch with his
wry neck, of Mistress Affery coming and going, would be thrown upon the
house wall that was over the gateway, and would hover there like shadows
from a great magic lantern. As the room-ridden invalid settled for the
night, these would gradually disappear: Mistress Affery's magnified
shadow always flitting about, last, until it finally glided away into
the air, as though she were off upon a witch excursion. Then the
solitary light would burn unchangingly, until it burned pale before the
dawn, and at last died under the breath of Mrs Affery, as her shadow
descended on it from the witch-region of sleep.

Strange, if the little sick-room fire were in effect a beacon fire,
summoning some one, and that the most unlikely some one in the world,
to the spot that _must_ be come to. Strange, if the little sick-room light
were in effect a watch-light, burning in that place every night until
an appointed event should be watched out! Which of the vast multitude
of travellers, under the sun and the stars, climbing the dusty hills
and toiling along the weary plains, journeying by land and journeying by
sea, coming and going so strangely, to meet and to act and react on one
another; which of the host may, with no suspicion of the journey's end,
be travelling surely hither?

Time shall show us. The post of honour and the post of shame, the
general's station and the drummer's, a peer's statue in Westminster
Abbey and a seaman's hammock in the bosom of the deep, the mitre and
the workhouse, the woolsack and the gallows, the throne and the
guillotine--the travellers to all are on the great high road, but it
has wonderful divergencies, and only Time shall show us whither each
traveller is bound.

On a wintry afternoon at twilight, Mrs Flintwinch, having been heavy all
day, dreamed this dream:

She thought she was in the kitchen getting the kettle ready for tea, and
was warming herself with her feet upon the fender and the skirt of her
gown tucked up, before the collapsed fire in the middle of the grate,
bordered on either hand by a deep cold black ravine. She thought that
as she sat thus, musing upon the question whether life was not for some
people a rather dull invention, she was frightened by a sudden noise
behind her. She thought that she had been similarly frightened once last
week, and that the noise was of a mysterious kind--a sound of rustling
and of three or four quick beats like a rapid step; while a shock or
tremble was communicated to her heart, as if the step had shaken the
floor, or even as if she had been touched by some awful hand. She
thought that this revived within her certain old fears of hers that
the house was haunted; and that she flew up the kitchen stairs without
knowing how she got up, to be nearer company.

Mistress Affery thought that on reaching the hall, she saw the door of
her liege lord's office standing open, and the room empty. That she went
to the ripped-up window in the little room by the street door to connect
her palpitating heart, through the glass, with living things beyond
and outside the haunted house. That she then saw, on the wall over the
gateway, the shadows of the two clever ones in conversation above. That
she then went upstairs with her shoes in her hand, partly to be near
the clever ones as a match for most ghosts, and partly to hear what they
were talking about.

'None of your nonsense with me,' said Mr Flintwinch. 'I won't take it
from you.'

Mrs Flintwinch dreamed that she stood behind the door, which was just
ajar, and most distinctly heard her husband say these bold words.

'Flintwinch,' returned Mrs Clennam, in her usual strong low voice,
'there is a demon of anger in you. Guard against it.'

'I don't care whether there's one or a dozen,' said Mr Flintwinch,
forcibly suggesting in his tone that the higher number was nearer the
mark. 'If there was fifty, they should all say, None of your nonsense
with me, I won't take it from you--I'd make 'em say it, whether they
liked it or not.'

'What have I done, you wrathful man?' her strong voice asked.

'Done?' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Dropped down upon me.'

'If you mean, remonstrated with you--'

'Don't put words into my mouth that I don't mean,' said Jeremiah,
sticking to his figurative expression with tenacious and impenetrable
obstinacy: 'I mean dropped down upon me.'

'I remonstrated with you,' she began again, 'because--'

'I won't have it!' cried Jeremiah. 'You dropped down upon me.'

'I dropped down upon you, then, you ill-conditioned man,' (Jeremiah
chuckled at having forced her to adopt his phrase,) 'for having been
needlessly significant to Arthur that morning. I have a right to
complain of it as almost a breach of confidence. You did not mean it--'

'I won't have it!' interposed the contradictory Jeremiah, flinging back
the concession. 'I did mean it.'

'I suppose I must leave you to speak in soliloquy if you choose,' she
replied, after a pause that seemed an angry one. 'It is useless my
addressing myself to a rash and headstrong old man who has a set purpose
not to hear me.'

'Now, I won't take that from you either,' said Jeremiah. 'I have no such
purpose. I have told you I did mean it. Do you wish to know why I meant
it, you rash and headstrong old woman?'

'After all, you only restore me my own words,' she said, struggling with
her indignation. 'Yes.'

'This is why, then. Because you hadn't cleared his father to him, and
you ought to have done it. Because, before you went into any tantrum
about yourself, who are--'

'Hold there, Flintwinch!' she cried out in a changed voice: 'you may go
a word too far.'

The old man seemed to think so. There was another pause, and he had
altered his position in the room, when he spoke again more mildly:

'I was going to tell you why it was. Because, before you took your own
part, I thought you ought to have taken the part of Arthur's father.
Arthur's father! I had no particular love for Arthur's father. I served
Arthur's father's uncle, in this house, when Arthur's father was not
much above me--was poorer as far as his pocket went--and when his uncle
might as soon have left me his heir as have left him. He starved in the
parlour, and I starved in the kitchen; that was the principal difference
in our positions; there was not much more than a flight of breakneck
stairs between us. I never took to him in those times; I don't know that
I ever took to him greatly at any time. He was an undecided, irresolute
chap, who had everything but his orphan life scared out of him when he
was young. And when he brought you home here, the wife his uncle
had named for him, I didn't need to look at you twice (you were a
good-looking woman at that time) to know who'd be master. You have stood
of your own strength ever since. Stand of your own strength now. Don't
lean against the dead.'

'I do _not_--as you call it--lean against the dead.'

'But you had a mind to do it, if I had submitted,' growled Jeremiah,
'and that's why you drop down upon me. You can't forget that I didn't
submit. I suppose you are astonished that I should consider it worth my
while to have justice done to Arthur's father? Hey? It doesn't matter
whether you answer or not, because I know you are, and you know you are.
Come, then, I'll tell you how it is. I may be a bit of an oddity in
point of temper, but this is my temper--I can't let anybody have
entirely their own way. You are a determined woman, and a clever woman;
and when you see your purpose before you, nothing will turn you from it.
Who knows that better than I do?'

'Nothing will turn me from it, Flintwinch, when I have justified it to
myself. Add that.'

'Justified it to yourself? I said you were the most determined woman on
the face of the earth (or I meant to say so), and if you are determined
to justify any object you entertain, of course you'll do it.'

'Man! I justify myself by the authority of these Books,' she cried, with
stern emphasis, and appearing from the sound that followed to strike the
dead-weight of her arm upon the table.

'Never mind that,' returned Jeremiah calmly, 'we won't enter into that
question at present. However that may be, you carry out your purposes,
and you make everything go down before them. Now, I won't go down before
them. I have been faithful to you, and useful to you, and I am attached
to you. But I can't consent, and I won't consent, and I never did
consent, and I never will consent to be lost in you. Swallow up
everybody else, and welcome. The peculiarity of my temper is, ma'am,
that I won't be swallowed up alive.'

Perhaps this had originally been the mainspring of the understanding
between them. Descrying thus much of force of character in Mr
Flintwinch, perhaps Mrs Clennam had deemed alliance with him worth her
while.

'Enough and more than enough of the subject,' said she gloomily.

'Unless you drop down upon me again,' returned the persistent
Flintwinch, 'and then you must expect to hear of it again.'

Mistress Affery dreamed that the figure of her lord here began walking
up and down the room, as if to cool his spleen, and that she ran away;
but that, as he did not issue forth when she had stood listening and
trembling in the shadowy hall a little time, she crept up-stairs again,
impelled as before by ghosts and curiosity, and once more cowered
outside the door.

'Please to light the candle, Flintwinch,' Mrs Clennam was saying,
apparently wishing to draw him back into their usual tone. 'It is nearly
time for tea. Little Dorrit is coming, and will find me in the dark.'

Mr Flintwinch lighted the candle briskly, and said as he put it down
upon the table:

'What are you going to do with Little Dorrit? Is she to come to work
here for ever? To come to tea here for ever? To come backwards and
forwards here, in the same way, for ever?'

'How can you talk about "for ever" to a maimed creature like me? Are we
not all cut down like the grass of the field, and was not I shorn by the
scythe many years ago: since when I have been lying here, waiting to be
gathered into the barn?'

'Ay, ay! But since you have been lying here--not near dead--nothing like
it--numbers of children and young people, blooming women, strong men,
and what not, have been cut down and carried; and still here are you,
you see, not much changed after all. Your time and mine may be a long
one yet. When I say for ever, I mean (though I am not poetical) through
all our time.' Mr Flintwinch gave this explanation with great calmness,
and calmly waited for an answer.

'So long as Little Dorrit is quiet and industrious, and stands in need
of the slight help I can give her, and deserves it; so long, I suppose,
unless she withdraws of her own act, she will continue to come here, I
being spared.'

'Nothing more than that?' said Flintwinch, stroking his mouth and chin.

'What should there be more than that! What could there be more than
that!' she ejaculated in her sternly wondering way.

Mrs Flintwinch dreamed, that, for the space of a minute or two, they
remained looking at each other with the candle between them, and
that she somehow derived an impression that they looked at each other
fixedly.

'Do you happen to know, Mrs Clennam,' Affery's liege lord then demanded
in a much lower voice, and with an amount of expression that seemed
quite out of proportion to the simple purpose of his words, 'where she
lives?'

'No.'

'Would you--now, would you like to know?' said Jeremiah with a pounce as
if he had sprung upon her.

'If I cared to know, I should know already. Could I not have asked her
any day?'

'Then you don't care to know?'

'I do not.'

Mr Flintwinch, having expelled a long significant breath said, with his
former emphasis, 'For I have accidentally--mind!--found out.'

'Wherever she lives,' said Mrs Clennam, speaking in one unmodulated hard
voice, and separating her words as distinctly as if she were reading
them off from separate bits of metal that she took up one by one, 'she
has made a secret of it, and she shall always keep her secret from me.'

'After all, perhaps you would rather not have known the fact, any how?'
said Jeremiah; and he said it with a twist, as if his words had come out
of him in his own wry shape.

'Flintwinch,' said his mistress and partner, flashing into a sudden
energy that made Affery start, 'why do you goad me? Look round this
room. If it is any compensation for my long confinement within these
narrow limits--not that I complain of being afflicted; you know I never
complain of that--if it is any compensation to me for long confinement
to this room, that while I am shut up from all pleasant change I am also
shut up from the knowledge of some things that I may prefer to avoid
knowing, why should you, of all men, grudge me that belief?'

'I don't grudge it to you,' returned Jeremiah.

'Then say no more. Say no more. Let Little Dorrit keep her secret from
me, and do you keep it from me also. Let her come and go, unobserved and
unquestioned. Let me suffer, and let me have what alleviation belongs to
my condition. Is it so much, that you torment me like an evil spirit?'

'I asked you a question. That's all.'

'I have answered it. So, say no more. Say no more.' Here the sound of
the wheeled chair was heard upon the floor, and Affery's bell rang with
a hasty jerk.

More afraid of her husband at the moment than of the mysterious sound in
the kitchen, Affery crept away as lightly and as quickly as she could,
descended the kitchen stairs almost as rapidly as she had ascended them,
resumed her seat before the fire, tucked up her skirt again, and finally
threw her apron over her head. Then the bell rang once more, and then
once more, and then kept on ringing; in despite of which importunate
summons, Affery still sat behind her apron, recovering her breath.

At last Mr Flintwinch came shuffling down the staircase into the
hall, muttering and calling 'Affery woman!' all the way. Affery still
remaining behind her apron, he came stumbling down the kitchen stairs,
candle in hand, sidled up to her, twitched her apron off, and roused
her.

'Oh Jeremiah!' cried Affery, waking. 'What a start you gave me!'

'What have you been doing, woman?' inquired Jeremiah. 'You've been rung
for fifty times.'

'Oh Jeremiah,' said Mistress Affery, 'I have been a-dreaming!'

Reminded of her former achievement in that way, Mr Flintwinch held the
candle to her head, as if he had some idea of lighting her up for the
illumination of the kitchen.

'Don't you know it's her tea-time?' he demanded with a vicious grin, and
giving one of the legs of Mistress Affery's chair a kick.

'Jeremiah? Tea-time? I don't know what's come to me. But I got such a
dreadful turn, Jeremiah, before I went--off a-dreaming, that I think it
must be that.'

'Yoogh! Sleepy-Head!' said Mr Flintwinch, 'what are you talking about?'

'Such a strange noise, Jeremiah, and such a curious movement. In the
kitchen here--just here.'

Jeremiah held up his light and looked at the blackened ceiling, held
down his light and looked at the damp stone floor, turned round with his
light and looked about at the spotted and blotched walls.

'Rats, cats, water, drains,' said Jeremiah.

Mistress Affery negatived each with a shake of her head. 'No, Jeremiah;
I have felt it before. I have felt it up-stairs, and once on the
staircase as I was going from her room to ours in the night--a rustle
and a sort of trembling touch behind me.'

'Affery, my woman,' said Mr Flintwinch grimly, after advancing his nose
to that lady's lips as a test for the detection of spirituous liquors,
'if you don't get tea pretty quick, old woman, you'll become sensible
of a rustle and a touch that'll send you flying to the other end of the
kitchen.'

This prediction stimulated Mrs Flintwinch to bestir herself, and to
hasten up-stairs to Mrs Clennam's chamber. But, for all that, she now
began to entertain a settled conviction that there was something wrong
in the gloomy house. Henceforth, she was never at peace in it after
daylight departed; and never went up or down stairs in the dark without
having her apron over her head, lest she should see something.

What with these ghostly apprehensions and her singular dreams, Mrs
Flintwinch fell that evening into a haunted state of mind, from which
it may be long before this present narrative descries any trace of her
recovery. In the vagueness and indistinctness of all her new experiences
and perceptions, as everything about her was mysterious to herself she
began to be mysterious to others: and became as difficult to be made out
to anybody's satisfaction as she found the house and everything in it
difficult to make out to her own.

She had not yet finished preparing Mrs Clennam's tea, when the soft
knock came to the door which always announced Little Dorrit. Mistress
Affery looked on at Little Dorrit taking off her homely bonnet in the
hall, and at Mr Flintwinch scraping his jaws and contemplating her in
silence, as expecting some wonderful consequence to ensue which would
frighten her out of her five wits or blow them all three to pieces.

After tea there came another knock at the door, announcing Arthur.
Mistress Affery went down to let him in, and he said on entering,
'Affery, I am glad it's you. I want to ask you a question.' Affery
immediately replied, 'For goodness sake don't ask me nothing, Arthur! I
am frightened out of one half of my life, and dreamed out of the
other. Don't ask me nothing! I don't know which is which, or what is
what!'--and immediately started away from him, and came near him no
more.

Mistress Affery having no taste for reading, and no sufficient light for
needlework in the subdued room, supposing her to have the inclination,
now sat every night in the dimness from which she had momentarily
emerged on the evening of Arthur Clennam's return, occupied with crowds
of wild speculations and suspicions respecting her mistress and her
husband and the noises in the house. When the ferocious devotional
exercises were engaged in, these speculations would distract Mistress
Affery's eyes towards the door, as if she expected some dark form to
appear at those propitious moments, and make the party one too many.

Otherwise, Affery never said or did anything to attract the attention of
the two clever ones towards her in any marked degree, except on certain
occasions, generally at about the quiet hour towards bed-time, when she
would suddenly dart out of her dim corner, and whisper with a face of
terror to Mr Flintwinch, reading the paper near Mrs Clennam's little
table:

'There, Jeremiah! Now! What's that noise?'

Then the noise, if there were any, would have ceased, and Mr Flintwinch
would snarl, turning upon her as if she had cut him down that moment
against his will, 'Affery, old woman, you shall have a dose, old woman,
such a dose! You have been dreaming again!'




CHAPTER 16. Nobody's Weakness


The time being come for the renewal of his acquaintance with the Meagles
family, Clennam, pursuant to contract made between himself and Mr
Meagles within the precincts of Bleeding Heart Yard, turned his face
on a certain Saturday towards Twickenham, where Mr Meagles had a
cottage-residence of his own. The weather being fine and dry, and any
English road abounding in interest for him who had been so long away,
he sent his valise on by the coach, and set out to walk. A walk was in
itself a new enjoyment to him, and one that had rarely diversified his
life afar off.

He went by Fulham and Putney, for the pleasure of strolling over the
heath. It was bright and shining there; and when he found himself so far
on his road to Twickenham, he found himself a long way on his road to
a number of airier and less substantial destinations. They had risen
before him fast, in the healthful exercise and the pleasant road. It is
not easy to walk alone in the country without musing upon something. And
he had plenty of unsettled subjects to meditate upon, though he had been
walking to the Land's End.

First, there was the subject seldom absent from his mind, the question,
what he was to do henceforth in life; to what occupation he should
devote himself, and in what direction he had best seek it. He was far
from rich, and every day of indecision and inaction made his inheritance
a source of greater anxiety to him. As often as he began to consider how
to increase this inheritance, or to lay it by, so often his misgiving
that there was some one with an unsatisfied claim upon his justice,
returned; and that alone was a subject to outlast the longest walk.
Again, there was the subject of his relations with his mother, which
were now upon an equable and peaceful but never confidential footing,
and whom he saw several times a week. Little Dorrit was a leading and a
constant subject: for the circumstances of his life, united to those of
her own story, presented the little creature to him as the only person
between whom and himself there were ties of innocent reliance on one
hand, and affectionate protection on the other; ties of compassion,
respect, unselfish interest, gratitude, and pity. Thinking of her, and
of the possibility of her father's release from prison by the unbarring
hand of death--the only change of circumstance he could foresee that
might enable him to be such a friend to her as he wished to be, by
altering her whole manner of life, smoothing her rough road, and
giving her a home--he regarded her, in that perspective, as his adopted
daughter, his poor child of the Marshalsea hushed to rest. If there were
a last subject in his thoughts, and it lay towards Twickenham, its form
was so indefinite that it was little more than the pervading atmosphere
in which these other subjects floated before him.

He had crossed the heath and was leaving it behind when he gained upon a
figure which had been in advance of him for some time, and which, as
he gained upon it, he thought he knew. He derived this impression
from something in the turn of the head, and in the figure's action of
consideration, as it went on at a sufficiently sturdy walk. But when
the man--for it was a man's figure--pushed his hat up at the back of his
head, and stopped to consider some object before him, he knew it to be
Daniel Doyce.

'How do you do, Mr Doyce?' said Clennam, overtaking him. 'I am glad to
see you again, and in a healthier place than the Circumlocution Office.'

'Ha! Mr Meagles's friend!' exclaimed that public criminal, coming out of
some mental combinations he had been making, and offering his hand. 'I
am glad to see you, sir. Will you excuse me if I forget your name?'

'Readily. It's not a celebrated name. It's not Barnacle.'

'No, no,' said Daniel, laughing. 'And now I know what it is. It's
Clennam. How do you do, Mr Clennam?'

'I have some hope,' said Arthur, as they walked on together, 'that we
may be going to the same place, Mr Doyce.'

'Meaning Twickenham?' returned Daniel. 'I am glad to hear it.'

They were soon quite intimate, and lightened the way with a variety of
conversation. The ingenious culprit was a man of great modesty and good
sense; and, though a plain man, had been too much accustomed to combine
what was original and daring in conception with what was patient and
minute in execution, to be by any means an ordinary man. It was at first
difficult to lead him to speak about himself, and he put off Arthur's
advances in that direction by admitting slightly, oh yes, he had done
this, and he had done that, and such a thing was of his making, and
such another thing was his discovery, but it was his trade, you see, his
trade; until, as he gradually became assured that his companion had a
real interest in his account of himself, he frankly yielded to it. Then
it appeared that he was the son of a north-country blacksmith, and had
originally been apprenticed by his widowed mother to a lock-maker; that
he had 'struck out a few little things' at the lock-maker's, which had
led to his being released from his indentures with a present, which
present had enabled him to gratify his ardent wish to bind himself to
a working engineer, under whom he had laboured hard, learned hard, and
lived hard, seven years. His time being out, he had 'worked in the shop'
at weekly wages seven or eight years more; and had then betaken
himself to the banks of the Clyde, where he had studied, and filed, and
hammered, and improved his knowledge, theoretical and practical, for six
or seven years more. There he had had an offer to go to Lyons, which he
had accepted; and from Lyons had been engaged to go to Germany, and in
Germany had had an offer to go to St Petersburg, and there had done very
well indeed--never better. However, he had naturally felt a preference
for his own country, and a wish to gain distinction there, and to do
whatever service he could do, there rather than elsewhere. And so he had
come home. And so at home he had established himself in business, and
had invented and executed, and worked his way on, until, after a dozen
years of constant suit and service, he had been enrolled in the
Great British Legion of Honour, the Legion of the Rebuffed of the
Circumlocution Office, and had been decorated with the Great British
Order of Merit, the Order of the Disorder of the Barnacles and
Stiltstalkings.

'It is much to be regretted,' said Clennam, 'that you ever turned your
thoughts that way, Mr Doyce.'

'True, sir, true to a certain extent. But what is a man to do? if he
has the misfortune to strike out something serviceable to the nation,
he must follow where it leads him.'

'Hadn't he better let it go?' said Clennam.

'He can't do it,' said Doyce, shaking his head with a thoughtful smile.
'It's not put into his head to be buried. It's put into his head to be
made useful. You hold your life on the condition that to the last you
shall struggle hard for it. Every man holds a discovery on the same
terms.'

'That is to say,' said Arthur, with a growing admiration of his quiet
companion, 'you are not finally discouraged even now?'

'I have no right to be, if I am,' returned the other. 'The thing is as
true as it ever was.'

When they had walked a little way in silence, Clennam, at once to
change the direct point of their conversation and not to change it
too abruptly, asked Mr Doyce if he had any partner in his business to
relieve him of a portion of its anxieties?

'No,' he returned, 'not at present. I had when I first entered on it,
and a good man he was. But he has been dead some years; and as I could
not easily take to the notion of another when I lost him, I bought
his share for myself and have gone on by myself ever since. And here's
another thing,' he said, stopping for a moment with a good-humoured
laugh in his eyes, and laying his closed right hand, with its peculiar
suppleness of thumb, on Clennam's arm, 'no inventor can be a man of
business, you know.'

'No?' said Clennam.

'Why, so the men of business say,' he answered, resuming the walk and
laughing outright. 'I don't know why we unfortunate creatures should
be supposed to want common sense, but it is generally taken for granted
that we do. Even the best friend I have in the world, our excellent
friend over yonder,' said Doyce, nodding towards Twickenham, 'extends
a sort of protection to me, don't you know, as a man not quite able to
take care of himself?'

Arthur Clennam could not help joining in the good-humoured laugh, for he
recognised the truth of the description.

'So I find that I must have a partner who is a man of business and not
guilty of any inventions,' said Daniel Doyce, taking off his hat to pass
his hand over his forehead, 'if it's only in deference to the current
opinion, and to uphold the credit of the Works. I don't think he'll find
that I have been very remiss or confused in my way of conducting them;
but that's for him to say--whoever he is--not for me.'

'You have not chosen him yet, then?'

'No, sir, no. I have only just come to a decision to take one. The fact
is, there's more to do than there used to be, and the Works are enough
for me as I grow older. What with the books and correspondence, and
foreign journeys for which a Principal is necessary, I can't do all. I
am going to talk over the best way of negotiating the matter, if I find
a spare half-hour between this and Monday morning, with my--my Nurse and
protector,' said Doyce, with laughing eyes again. 'He is a sagacious man
in business, and has had a good apprenticeship to it.'

After this, they conversed on different subjects until they arrived at
their journey's end. A composed and unobtrusive self-sustainment was
noticeable in Daniel Doyce--a calm knowledge that what was true must
remain true, in spite of all the Barnacles in the family ocean, and
would be just the truth, and neither more nor less when even that sea
had run dry--which had a kind of greatness in it, though not of the
official quality.

As he knew the house well, he conducted Arthur to it by the way that
showed it to the best advantage. It was a charming place (none the worse
for being a little eccentric), on the road by the river, and just what
the residence of the Meagles family ought to be. It stood in a garden,
no doubt as fresh and beautiful in the May of the Year as Pet now was
in the May of her life; and it was defended by a goodly show of handsome
trees and spreading evergreens, as Pet was by Mr and Mrs Meagles. It
was made out of an old brick house, of which a part had been altogether
pulled down, and another part had been changed into the present cottage;
so there was a hale elderly portion, to represent Mr and Mrs Meagles,
and a young picturesque, very pretty portion to represent Pet. There was
even the later addition of a conservatory sheltering itself against it,
uncertain of hue in its deep-stained glass, and in its more transparent
portions flashing to the sun's rays, now like fire and now like harmless
water drops; which might have stood for Tattycoram. Within view was
the peaceful river and the ferry-boat, to moralise to all the inmates
saying: Young or old, passionate or tranquil, chafing or content, you,
thus runs the current always. Let the heart swell into what discord it
will, thus plays the rippling water on the prow of the ferry-boat ever
the same tune. Year after year, so much allowance for the drifting of
the boat, so many miles an hour the flowing of the stream, here the
rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet, upon this road
that steadily runs away; while you, upon your flowing road of time, are
so capricious and distracted.

The bell at the gate had scarcely sounded when Mr Meagles came out to
receive them. Mr Meagles had scarcely come out, when Mrs Meagles came
out. Mrs Meagles had scarcely come out, when Pet came out. Pet scarcely
had come out, when Tattycoram came out. Never had visitors a more
hospitable reception.

'Here we are, you see,' said Mr Meagles, 'boxed up, Mr Clennam, within
our own home-limits, as if we were never going to expand--that is,
travel--again. Not like Marseilles, eh? No allonging and marshonging
here!'

'A different kind of beauty, indeed!' said Clennam, looking about him.

'But, Lord bless me!' cried Mr Meagles, rubbing his hands with a relish,
'it was an uncommonly pleasant thing being in quarantine, wasn't it?
Do you know, I have often wished myself back again? We were a capital
party.'

This was Mr Meagles's invariable habit. Always to object to everything
while he was travelling, and always to want to get back to it when he
was not travelling.

'If it was summer-time,' said Mr Meagles, 'which I wish it was on your
account, and in order that you might see the place at its best, you
would hardly be able to hear yourself speak for birds. Being practical
people, we never allow anybody to scare the birds; and the birds, being
practical people too, come about us in myriads. We are delighted to see
you, Clennam (if you'll allow me, I shall drop the Mister); I heartily
assure you, we are delighted.'

'I have not had so pleasant a greeting,' said Clennam--then he recalled
what Little Dorrit had said to him in his own room, and faithfully
added 'except once--since we last walked to and fro, looking down at the
Mediterranean.'

'Ah!' returned Mr Meagles. 'Something like a look out, _that_ was, wasn't
it? I don't want a military government, but I shouldn't mind a little
allonging and marshonging--just a dash of it--in this neighbourhood
sometimes. It's Devilish still.'

Bestowing this eulogium on the retired character of his retreat with a
dubious shake of the head, Mr Meagles led the way into the house. It was
just large enough, and no more; was as pretty within as it was without,
and was perfectly well-arranged and comfortable. Some traces of the
migratory habits of the family were to be observed in the covered frames
and furniture, and wrapped-up hangings; but it was easy to see that it
was one of Mr Meagles's whims to have the cottage always kept, in their
absence, as if they were always coming back the day after to-morrow. Of
articles collected on his various expeditions, there was such a vast
miscellany that it was like the dwelling of an amiable Corsair. There
were antiquities from Central Italy, made by the best modern houses in
that department of industry; bits of mummy from Egypt (and perhaps
Birmingham); model gondolas from Venice; model villages from
Switzerland; morsels of tesselated pavement from Herculaneum and
Pompeii, like petrified minced veal; ashes out of tombs, and lava out of
Vesuvius; Spanish fans, Spezzian straw hats, Moorish slippers, Tuscan
hairpins, Carrara sculpture, Trastaverini scarves, Genoese velvets and
filigree, Neapolitan coral, Roman cameos, Geneva jewellery, Arab
lanterns, rosaries blest all round by the Pope himself, and an infinite
variety of lumber. There were views, like and unlike, of a multitude of
places; and there was one little picture-room devoted to a few of the
regular sticky old Saints, with sinews like whipcord, hair like
Neptune's, wrinkles like tattooing, and such coats of varnish that every
holy personage served for a fly-trap, and became what is now called in
the vulgar tongue a Catch-em-alive O. Of these pictorial acquisitions Mr
Meagles spoke in the usual manner. He was no judge, he said, except of
what pleased himself; he had picked them up, dirt-cheap, and people
_had_ considered them rather fine. One man, who at any rate ought to
know something of the subject, had declared that 'Sage, Reading' (a
specially oily old gentleman in a blanket, with a swan's-down tippet for
a beard, and a web of cracks all over him like rich pie-crust), to be a
fine Guercino. As for Sebastian del Piombo there, you would judge for
yourself; if it were not his later manner, the question was, Who was it?
Titian, that might or might not be--perhaps he had only touched it.
Daniel Doyce said perhaps he hadn't touched it, but Mr Meagles rather
declined to overhear the remark.

When he had shown all his spoils, Mr Meagles took them into his own
snug room overlooking the lawn, which was fitted up in part like a
dressing-room and in part like an office, and in which, upon a kind of
counter-desk, were a pair of brass scales for weighing gold, and a scoop
for shovelling out money.

'Here they are, you see,' said Mr Meagles. 'I stood behind these two
articles five-and-thirty years running, when I no more thought of
gadding about than I now think of--staying at home. When I left the Bank
for good, I asked for them, and brought them away with me. I mention it
at once, or you might suppose that I sit in my counting-house (as Pet
says I do), like the king in the poem of the four-and-twenty blackbirds,
counting out my money.'

Clennam's eyes had strayed to a natural picture on the wall, of two
pretty little girls with their arms entwined. 'Yes, Clennam,' said
Mr Meagles, in a lower voice. 'There they both are. It was taken some
seventeen years ago. As I often say to Mother, they were babies then.'

'Their names?' said Arthur.

'Ah, to be sure! You have never heard any name but Pet. Pet's name is
Minnie; her sister's Lillie.'

'Should you have known, Mr Clennam, that one of them was meant for me?'
asked Pet herself, now standing in the doorway.

'I might have thought that both of them were meant for you, both
are still so like you. Indeed,' said Clennam, glancing from the fair
original to the picture and back, 'I cannot even now say which is not
your portrait.'

'D'ye hear that, Mother?' cried Mr Meagles to his wife, who had followed
her daughter. 'It's always the same, Clennam; nobody can decide. The
child to your left is Pet.'

The picture happened to be near a looking-glass. As Arthur looked at
it again, he saw, by the reflection of the mirror, Tattycoram stop in
passing outside the door, listen to what was going on, and pass away
with an angry and contemptuous frown upon her face, that changed its
beauty into ugliness.

'But come!' said Mr Meagles. 'You have had a long walk, and will be glad
to get your boots off. As to Daniel here, I suppose he'd never think of
taking _his_ boots off, unless we showed him a boot-jack.'

'Why not?' asked Daniel, with a significant smile at Clennam.

'Oh! You have so many things to think about,' returned Mr Meagles,
clapping him on the shoulder, as if his weakness must not be left to
itself on any account. 'Figures, and wheels, and cogs, and levers, and
screws, and cylinders, and a thousand things.'

'In my calling,' said Daniel, amused, 'the greater usually includes the
less. But never mind, never mind! Whatever pleases you, pleases me.'

Clennam could not help speculating, as he seated himself in his room
by the fire, whether there might be in the breast of this honest,
affectionate, and cordial Mr Meagles, any microscopic portion of
the mustard-seed that had sprung up into the great tree of the
Circumlocution Office. His curious sense of a general superiority to
Daniel Doyce, which seemed to be founded, not so much on anything
in Doyce's personal character as on the mere fact of his being an
originator and a man out of the beaten track of other men, suggested the
idea. It might have occupied him until he went down to dinner an hour
afterwards, if he had not had another question to consider, which
had been in his mind so long ago as before he was in quarantine at
Marseilles, and which had now returned to it, and was very urgent with
it. No less a question than this: Whether he should allow himself to
fall in love with Pet?

He was twice her age. (He changed the leg he had crossed over the other,
and tried the calculation again, but could not bring out the total at
less.) He was twice her age. Well! He was young in appearance, young
in health and strength, young in heart. A man was certainly not old
at forty; and many men were not in circumstances to marry, or did not
marry, until they had attained that time of life. On the other hand, the
question was, not what he thought of the point, but what she thought of
it.

He believed that Mr Meagles was disposed to entertain a ripe regard for
him, and he knew that he had a sincere regard for Mr Meagles and his
good wife. He could foresee that to relinquish this beautiful only
child, of whom they were so fond, to any husband, would be a trial
of their love which perhaps they never yet had had the fortitude to
contemplate. But the more beautiful and winning and charming she, the
nearer they must always be to the necessity of approaching it. And why
not in his favour, as well as in another's?

When he had got so far, it came again into his head that the question
was, not what they thought of it, but what she thought of it.

Arthur Clennam was a retiring man, with a sense of many deficiencies;
and he so exalted the merits of the beautiful Minnie in his mind, and
depressed his own, that when he pinned himself to this point, his hopes
began to fail him. He came to the final resolution, as he made himself
ready for dinner, that he would not allow himself to fall in love with
Pet.

There were only five, at a round table, and it was very pleasant indeed.
They had so many places and people to recall, and they were all so easy
and cheerful together (Daniel Doyce either sitting out like an amused
spectator at cards, or coming in with some shrewd little experiences of
his own, when it happened to be to the purpose), that they might have
been together twenty times, and not have known so much of one another.

'And Miss Wade,' said Mr Meagles, after they had recalled a number of
fellow-travellers. 'Has anybody seen Miss Wade?'

'I have,' said Tattycoram.

She had brought a little mantle which her young mistress had sent for,
and was bending over her, putting it on, when she lifted up her dark
eyes and made this unexpected answer.

'Tatty!' her young mistress exclaimed. 'You seen Miss Wade?--where?'

'Here, miss,' said Tattycoram.

'How?'

An impatient glance from Tattycoram seemed, as Clennam saw it, to answer
'With my eyes!' But her only answer in words was: 'I met her near the
church.'

'What was she doing there I wonder!' said Mr Meagles. 'Not going to it,
I should think.'

'She had written to me first,' said Tattycoram.

'Oh, Tatty!' murmured her mistress, 'take your hands away. I feel as if
some one else was touching me!'

She said it in a quick involuntary way, but half playfully, and not more
petulantly or disagreeably than a favourite child might have done, who
laughed next moment. Tattycoram set her full red lips together, and
crossed her arms upon her bosom.

'Did you wish to know, sir,' she said, looking at Mr Meagles, 'what Miss
Wade wrote to me about?'

'Well, Tattycoram,' returned Mr Meagles, 'since you ask the question,
and we are all friends here, perhaps you may as well mention it, if you
are so inclined.'

'She knew, when we were travelling, where you lived,' said Tattycoram,
'and she had seen me not quite--not quite--'

'Not quite in a good temper, Tattycoram?' suggested Mr Meagles,
shaking his head at the dark eyes with a quiet caution. 'Take a little
time--count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

She pressed her lips together again, and took a long deep breath.

'So she wrote to me to say that if I ever felt myself hurt,' she looked
down at her young mistress, 'or found myself worried,' she looked down
at her again, 'I might go to her, and be considerately treated. I was
to think of it, and could speak to her by the church. So I went there to
thank her.'

'Tatty,' said her young mistress, putting her hand up over her shoulder
that the other might take it, 'Miss Wade almost frightened me when we
parted, and I scarcely like to think of her just now as having been so
near me without my knowing it. Tatty dear!'

Tatty stood for a moment, immovable.

'Hey?' cried Mr Meagles. 'Count another five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

She might have counted a dozen, when she bent and put her lips to the
caressing hand. It patted her cheek, as it touched the owner's beautiful
curls, and Tattycoram went away.

'Now there,' said Mr Meagles softly, as he gave a turn to the
dumb-waiter on his right hand to twirl the sugar towards himself.
'There's a girl who might be lost and ruined, if she wasn't among
practical people. Mother and I know, solely from being practical, that
there are times when that girl's whole nature seems to roughen itself
against seeing us so bound up in Pet. No father and mother were bound
up in her, poor soul. I don't like to think of the way in which that
unfortunate child, with all that passion and protest in her, feels when
she hears the Fifth Commandment on a Sunday. I am always inclined to
call out, Church, Count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

Besides his dumb-waiter, Mr Meagles had two other not dumb waiters in
the persons of two parlour-maids with rosy faces and bright eyes, who
were a highly ornamental part of the table decoration. 'And why not, you
see?' said Mr Meagles on this head. 'As I always say to Mother, why
not have something pretty to look at, if you have anything at all?'

A certain Mrs Tickit, who was Cook and Housekeeper when the family were
at home, and Housekeeper only when the family were away, completed the
establishment. Mr Meagles regretted that the nature of the duties in
which she was engaged, rendered Mrs Tickit unpresentable at present,
but hoped to introduce her to the new visitor to-morrow. She was an
important part of the Cottage, he said, and all his friends knew her.
That was her picture up in the corner. When they went away, she always
put on the silk-gown and the jet-black row of curls represented in that
portrait (her hair was reddish-grey in the kitchen), established herself
in the breakfast-room, put her spectacles between two particular leaves
of Doctor Buchan's Domestic Medicine, and sat looking over the blind all
day until they came back again. It was supposed that no persuasion could
be invented which would induce Mrs Tickit to abandon her post at the
blind, however long their absence, or to dispense with the attendance
of Dr Buchan; the lucubrations of which learned practitioner, Mr Meagles
implicitly believed she had never yet consulted to the extent of one
word in her life.

In the evening they played an old-fashioned rubber; and Pet sat looking
over her father's hand, or singing to herself by fits and starts at the
piano. She was a spoilt child; but how could she be otherwise? Who could
be much with so pliable and beautiful a creature, and not yield to her
endearing influence? Who could pass an evening in the house, and not
love her for the grace and charm of her very presence in the room? This
was Clennam's reflection, notwithstanding the final conclusion at which
he had arrived up-stairs.

In making it, he revoked. 'Why, what are you thinking of, my good sir?'
asked the astonished Mr Meagles, who was his partner. 'I beg your
pardon. Nothing,' returned Clennam. 'Think of something, next time;
that's a dear fellow,' said Mr Meagles. Pet laughingly believed he had
been thinking of Miss Wade. 'Why of Miss Wade, Pet?' asked her father.
'Why, indeed!' said Arthur Clennam. Pet coloured a little, and went to
the piano again.

As they broke up for the night, Arthur overheard Doyce ask his host if
he could give him half an hour's conversation before breakfast in the
morning? The host replying willingly, Arthur lingered behind a moment,
having his own word to add to that topic.

'Mr Meagles,' he said, on their being left alone, 'do you remember when
you advised me to go straight to London?'

'Perfectly well.'

'And when you gave me some other good advice which I needed at that time?'

'I won't say what it was worth,' answered Mr Meagles: 'but of course I
remember our being very pleasant and confidential together.'

'I have acted on your advice; and having disembarrassed myself of an
occupation that was painful to me for many reasons, wish to devote
myself and what means I have, to another pursuit.'

'Right! You can't do it too soon,' said Mr Meagles.

'Now, as I came down to-day, I found that your friend, Mr Doyce, is
looking for a partner in his business--not a partner in his mechanical
knowledge, but in the ways and means of turning the business arising
from it to the best account.'

'Just so,' said Mr Meagles, with his hands in his pockets, and with
the old business expression of face that had belonged to the scales and
scoop.

'Mr Doyce mentioned incidentally, in the course of our conversation,
that he was going to take your valuable advice on the subject of finding
such a partner. If you should think our views and opportunities at all
likely to coincide, perhaps you will let him know my available position.
I speak, of course, in ignorance of the details, and they may be
unsuitable on both sides.'

'No doubt, no doubt,' said Mr Meagles, with the caution belonging to the
scales and scoop.

'But they will be a question of figures and accounts--'

'Just so, just so,' said Mr Meagles, with arithmetical solidity
belonging to the scales and scoop.

