for I really cannot, and will not, have another such day as this has
been.'

Mr Sparkler's sentiments as to the plan were, in brief, that it had no
nonsense about it. He added, 'And besides, you know it's likely that
you'll soon have your sister--'

'Dearest Amy, yes!' cried Mrs Sparkler with a sigh of affection.
'Darling little thing! Not, however, that Amy would do here alone.'

Mr Sparkler was going to say 'No?' interrogatively, but he saw his
danger and said it assentingly, 'No, Oh dear no; she wouldn't do here
alone.'

'No, Edmund. For not only are the virtues of the precious child of that
still character that they require a contrast--require life and movement
around them to bring them out in their right colours and make one love
them of all things; but she will require to be roused, on more accounts
than one.'

'That's it,' said Mr Sparkler. 'Roused.'

'Pray don't, Edmund! Your habit of interrupting without having the least
thing in the world to say, distracts one. You must be broken of it.
Speaking of Amy;--my poor little pet was devotedly attached to poor
papa, and no doubt will have lamented his loss exceedingly, and grieved
very much. I have done so myself. I have felt it dreadfully. But Amy
will no doubt have felt it even more, from having been on the spot the
whole time, and having been with poor dear papa at the last; which I
unhappily was not.'

Here Fanny stopped to weep, and to say, 'Dear, dear, beloved papa! How
truly gentlemanly he was! What a contrast to poor uncle!'

'From the effects of that trying time,' she pursued, 'my good little
Mouse will have to be roused. Also, from the effects of this long
attendance upon Edward in his illness; an attendance which is not
yet over, which may even go on for some time longer, and which in the
meanwhile unsettles us all by keeping poor dear papa's affairs from
being wound up. Fortunately, however, the papers with his agents
here being all sealed up and locked up, as he left them when he
providentially came to England, the affairs are in that state of order
that they can wait until my brother Edward recovers his health in
Sicily, sufficiently to come over, and administer, or execute, or
whatever it may be that will have to be done.'

'He couldn't have a better nurse to bring him round,' Mr Sparkler made
bold to opine.

'For a wonder, I can agree with you,' returned his wife, languidly
turning her eyelids a little in his direction (she held forth, in
general, as if to the drawing-room furniture), 'and can adopt your
words. He couldn't have a better nurse to bring him round. There are
times when my dear child is a little wearing to an active mind; but, as
a nurse, she is Perfection. Best of Amys!'

Mr Sparkler, growing rash on his late success, observed that Edward had
had, biggodd, a long bout of it, my dear girl.

'If Bout, Edmund,' returned Mrs Sparkler, 'is the slang term for
indisposition, he has. If it is not, I am unable to give an opinion
on the barbarous language you address to Edward's sister. That he
contracted Malaria Fever somewhere, either by travelling day and night
to Rome, where, after all, he arrived too late to see poor dear papa
before his death--or under some other unwholesome circumstances--is
indubitable, if that is what you mean. Likewise that his extremely
careless life has made him a very bad subject for it indeed.'

Mr Sparkler considered it a parallel case to that of some of our fellows
in the West Indies with Yellow Jack. Mrs Sparkler closed her eyes again,
and refused to have any consciousness of our fellows of the West Indies,
or of Yellow Jack.

'So, Amy,' she pursued, when she reopened her eyelids, 'will require
to be roused from the effects of many tedious and anxious weeks. And
lastly, she will require to be roused from a low tendency which I know
very well to be at the bottom of her heart. Don't ask me what it is,
Edmund, because I must decline to tell you.'

'I am not going to, my dear,' said Mr Sparkler.

'I shall thus have much improvement to effect in my sweet child,' Mrs
Sparkler continued, 'and cannot have her near me too soon. Amiable and
dear little Twoshoes! As to the settlement of poor papa's affairs, my
interest in that is not very selfish. Papa behaved very generously to me
when I was married, and I have little or nothing to expect. Provided
he had made no will that can come into force, leaving a legacy to Mrs
General, I am contented. Dear papa, dear papa.'

She wept again, but Mrs General was the best of restoratives. The name
soon stimulated her to dry her eyes and say:

'It is a highly encouraging circumstance in Edward's illness, I am
thankful to think, and gives one the greatest confidence in his sense
not being impaired, or his proper spirit weakened--down to the time
of poor dear papa's death at all events--that he paid off Mrs General
instantly, and sent her out of the house. I applaud him for it. I could
forgive him a great deal for doing, with such promptitude, so exactly
what I would have done myself!'

Mrs Sparkler was in the full glow of her gratification, when a double
knock was heard at the door. A very odd knock. Low, as if to avoid
making a noise and attracting attention. Long, as if the person knocking
were preoccupied in mind, and forgot to leave off.

'Halloa!' said Mr Sparkler. 'Who's this?'

'Not Amy and Edward without notice and without a carriage!' said Mrs
Sparkler. 'Look out.'

The room was dark, but the street was lighter, because of its lamps. Mr
Sparkler's head peeping over the balcony looked so very bulky and heavy
that it seemed on the point of overbalancing him and flattening the
unknown below.

'It's one fellow,' said Mr Sparkler. 'I can't see who--stop though!'

On this second thought he went out into the balcony again and had
another look. He came back as the door was opened, and announced that he
believed he had identified 'his governor's tile.' He was not mistaken,
for his governor, with his tile in his hand, was introduced immediately
afterwards.

'Candles!' said Mrs Sparkler, with a word of excuse for the darkness.

'It's light enough for me,' said Mr Merdle.

When the candles were brought in, Mr Merdle was discovered standing
behind the door, picking his lips. 'I thought I'd give you a call,' he
said. 'I am rather particularly occupied just now; and, as I happened to
be out for a stroll, I thought I'd give you a call.'

As he was in dinner dress, Fanny asked him where he had been dining?

'Well,' said Mr Merdle, 'I haven't been dining anywhere, particularly.'

'Of course you have dined?' said Fanny.

'Why--no, I haven't exactly dined,' said Mr Merdle.

He had passed his hand over his yellow forehead and considered, as if he
were not sure about it. Something to eat was proposed. 'No, thank you,'
said Mr Merdle, 'I don't feel inclined for it. I was to have dined out
along with Mrs Merdle. But as I didn't feel inclined for dinner, I let
Mrs Merdle go by herself just as we were getting into the carriage, and
thought I'd take a stroll instead.'

Would he have tea or coffee? 'No, thank you,' said Mr Merdle. 'I looked
in at the Club, and got a bottle of wine.'

At this period of his visit, Mr Merdle took the chair which Edmund
Sparkler had offered him, and which he had hitherto been pushing slowly
about before him, like a dull man with a pair of skates on for the first
time, who could not make up his mind to start. He now put his hat upon
another chair beside him, and, looking down into it as if it were some
twenty feet deep, said again: 'You see I thought I'd give you a call.'

'Flattering to us,' said Fanny, 'for you are not a calling man.'

'No--no,' returned Mr Merdle, who was by this time taking himself into
custody under both coat-sleeves. 'No, I am not a calling man.'

'You have too much to do for that,' said Fanny. 'Having so much to do,
Mr Merdle, loss of appetite is a serious thing with you, and you must
have it seen to. You must not be ill.'

'Oh! I am very well,' replied Mr Merdle, after deliberating about it. 'I
am as well as I usually am. I am well enough. I am as well as I want to
be.'

The master-mind of the age, true to its characteristic of being at all
times a mind that had as little as possible to say for itself and great
difficulty in saying it, became mute again. Mrs Sparkler began to wonder
how long the master-mind meant to stay.

'I was speaking of poor papa when you came in, sir.'

'Aye! Quite a coincidence,' said Mr Merdle.

Fanny did not see that; but felt it incumbent on her to continue
talking. 'I was saying,' she pursued, 'that my brother's illness has
occasioned a delay in examining and arranging papa's property.'

'Yes,' said Mr Merdle; 'yes. There has been a delay.'

'Not that it is of consequence,' said Fanny.

'Not,' assented Mr Merdle, after having examined the cornice of all
that part of the room which was within his range: 'not that it is of any
consequence.'

'My only anxiety is,' said Fanny, 'that Mrs General should not get
anything.'

'_She_ won't get anything,' said Mr Merdle.

Fanny was delighted to hear him express the opinion. Mr Merdle, after
taking another gaze into the depths of his hat as if he thought he saw
something at the bottom, rubbed his hair and slowly appended to his last
remark the confirmatory words, 'Oh dear no. No. Not she. Not likely.'

As the topic seemed exhausted, and Mr Merdle too, Fanny inquired if he
were going to take up Mrs Merdle and the carriage in his way home?

'No,' he answered; 'I shall go by the shortest way, and leave Mrs Merdle
to--' here he looked all over the palms of both his hands as if he were
telling his own fortune--'to take care of herself. I dare say she'll
manage to do it.'

'Probably,' said Fanny.

There was then a long silence; during which, Mrs Sparkler, lying back
on her sofa again, shut her eyes and raised her eyebrows in her former
retirement from mundane affairs.

'But, however,' said Mr Merdle, 'I am equally detaining you and myself.
I thought I'd give you a call, you know.'

'Charmed, I am sure,' said Fanny.

'So I am off,' added Mr Merdle, getting up. 'Could you lend me a
penknife?'

It was an odd thing, Fanny smilingly observed, for her who could seldom
prevail upon herself even to write a letter, to lend to a man of such
vast business as Mr Merdle. 'Isn't it?' Mr Merdle acquiesced; 'but
I want one; and I know you have got several little wedding keepsakes
about, with scissors and tweezers and such things in them. You shall
have it back to-morrow.'

'Edmund,' said Mrs Sparkler, 'open (now, very carefully, I beg and
beseech, for you are so very awkward) the mother of pearl box on my
little table there, and give Mr Merdle the mother of pearl penknife.'

'Thank you,' said Mr Merdle; 'but if you have got one with a darker
handle, I think I should prefer one with a darker handle.'

'Tortoise-shell?'

'Thank you,' said Mr Merdle; 'yes. I think I should prefer
tortoise-shell.'

Edmund accordingly received instructions to open the tortoise-shell box,
and give Mr Merdle the tortoise-shell knife. On his doing so, his wife
said to the master-spirit graciously:

'I will forgive you, if you ink it.'

'I'll undertake not to ink it,' said Mr Merdle.

The illustrious visitor then put out his coat-cuff, and for a moment
entombed Mrs Sparkler's hand: wrist, bracelet, and all. Where his own
hand had shrunk to, was not made manifest, but it was as remote from Mrs
Sparkler's sense of touch as if he had been a highly meritorious Chelsea
Veteran or Greenwich Pensioner.

Thoroughly convinced, as he went out of the room, that it was the
longest day that ever did come to an end at last, and that there never
was a woman, not wholly devoid of personal attractions, so worn out by
idiotic and lumpish people, Fanny passed into the balcony for a breath
of air. Waters of vexation filled her eyes; and they had the effect of
making the famous Mr Merdle, in going down the street, appear to leap,
and waltz, and gyrate, as if he were possessed of several Devils.




CHAPTER 25. The Chief Butler Resigns the Seals of Office


The dinner-party was at the great Physician's. Bar was there, and in
full force. Ferdinand Barnacle was there, and in his most engaging
state. Few ways of life were hidden from Physician, and he was oftener
in its darkest places than even Bishop. There were brilliant ladies
about London who perfectly doted on him, my dear, as the most charming
creature and the most delightful person, who would have been shocked to
find themselves so close to him if they could have known on what sights
those thoughtful eyes of his had rested within an hour or two, and near
to whose beds, and under what roofs, his composed figure had stood. But
Physician was a composed man, who performed neither on his own trumpet,
nor on the trumpets of other people. Many wonderful things did he see
and hear, and much irreconcilable moral contradiction did he pass his
life among; yet his equality of compassion was no more disturbed than
the Divine Master's of all healing was. He went, like the rain,
among the just and unjust, doing all the good he could, and neither
proclaiming it in the synagogues nor at the corner of streets.

As no man of large experience of humanity, however quietly carried
it may be, can fail to be invested with an interest peculiar to the
possession of such knowledge, Physician was an attractive man. Even the
daintier gentlemen and ladies who had no idea of his secret, and
who would have been startled out of more wits than they had, by the
monstrous impropriety of his proposing to them 'Come and see what I
see!' confessed his attraction. Where he was, something real was. And
half a grain of reality, like the smallest portion of some other scarce
natural productions, will flavour an enormous quantity of diluent.

It came to pass, therefore, that Physician's little dinners always
presented people in their least conventional lights. The guests said to
themselves, whether they were conscious of it or no, 'Here is a man who
really has an acquaintance with us as we are, who is admitted to some
of us every day with our wigs and paint off, who hears the wanderings of
our minds, and sees the undisguised expression of our faces, when both
are past our control; we may as well make an approach to reality with
him, for the man has got the better of us and is too strong for us.'
Therefore, Physician's guests came out so surprisingly at his round
table that they were almost natural.

Bar's knowledge of that agglomeration of jurymen which is called
humanity was as sharp as a razor; yet a razor is not a generally
convenient instrument, and Physician's plain bright scalpel, though far
less keen, was adaptable to far wider purposes. Bar knew all about the
gullibility and knavery of people; but Physician could have given him
a better insight into their tendernesses and affections, in one week of
his rounds, than Westminster Hall and all the circuits put together,
in threescore years and ten. Bar always had a suspicion of this, and
perhaps was glad to encourage it (for, if the world were really a great
Law Court, one would think that the last day of Term could not too soon
arrive); and so he liked and respected Physician quite as much as any
other kind of man did.

Mr Merdle's default left a Banquo's chair at the table; but, if he had
been there, he would have merely made the difference of Banquo in it,
and consequently he was no loss. Bar, who picked up all sorts of odds
and ends about Westminster Hall, much as a raven would have done if he
had passed as much of his time there, had been picking up a great many
straws lately and tossing them about, to try which way the Merdle wind
blew. He now had a little talk on the subject with Mrs Merdle herself;
sidling up to that lady, of course, with his double eye-glass and his
jury droop.

'A certain bird,' said Bar; and he looked as if it could have been no
other bird than a magpie; 'has been whispering among us lawyers lately,
that there is to be an addition to the titled personages of this realm.'

'Really?' said Mrs Merdle.

'Yes,' said Bar. 'Has not the bird been whispering in very different
ears from ours--in lovely ears?' He looked expressively at Mrs Merdle's
nearest ear-ring.

'Do you mean mine?' asked Mrs Merdle.

'When I say lovely,' said Bar, 'I always mean you.'

'You never mean anything, I think,' returned Mrs Merdle (not
displeased).

'Oh, cruelly unjust!' said Bar. 'But, the bird.'

'I am the last person in the world to hear news,' observed Mrs Merdle,
carelessly arranging her stronghold. 'Who is it?'

'What an admirable witness you would make!' said Bar. 'No jury (unless
we could empanel one of blind men) could resist you, if you were ever so
bad a one; but you would be such a good one!'

'Why, you ridiculous man?' asked Mrs Merdle, laughing.

Bar waved his double eye-glass three or four times between himself and
the Bosom, as a rallying answer, and inquired in his most insinuating
accents:

'What am I to call the most elegant, accomplished and charming of women,
a few weeks, or it may be a few days, hence?'

'Didn't your bird tell you what to call her?' answered Mrs Merdle. 'Do
ask it to-morrow, and tell me the next time you see me what it says.'

This led to further passages of similar pleasantry between the two; but
Bar, with all his sharpness, got nothing out of them. Physician, on the
other hand, taking Mrs Merdle down to her carriage and attending on her
as she put on her cloak, inquired into the symptoms with his usual calm
directness.

'May I ask,' he said, 'is this true about Merdle?'

'My dear doctor,' she returned, 'you ask me the very question that I was
half disposed to ask you.'

'To ask me! Why me?'

'Upon my honour, I think Mr Merdle reposes greater confidence in you
than in any one.'

'On the contrary, he tells me absolutely nothing, even professionally.
You have heard the talk, of course?'

'Of course I have. But you know what Mr Merdle is; you know how
taciturn and reserved he is. I assure you I have no idea what foundation
for it there may be. I should like it to be true; why should I deny that
to you? You would know better, if I did!'

'Just so,' said Physician.

'But whether it is all true, or partly true, or entirely false, I am
wholly unable to say. It is a most provoking situation, a most absurd
situation; but you know Mr Merdle, and are not surprised.'

Physician was not surprised, handed her into her carriage, and bade her
Good Night. He stood for a moment at his own hall door, looking sedately
at the elegant equipage as it rattled away. On his return up-stairs, the
rest of the guests soon dispersed, and he was left alone. Being a great
reader of all kinds of literature (and never at all apologetic for that
weakness), he sat down comfortably to read.

The clock upon his study table pointed to a few minutes short of twelve,
when his attention was called to it by a ringing at the door bell. A man
of plain habits, he had sent his servants to bed and must needs go down
to open the door. He went down, and there found a man without hat or
coat, whose shirt sleeves were rolled up tight to his shoulders. For a
moment, he thought the man had been fighting: the rather, as he was much
agitated and out of breath. A second look, however, showed him that
the man was particularly clean, and not otherwise discomposed as to his
dress than as it answered this description.

'I come from the warm-baths, sir, round in the neighbouring street.'

'And what is the matter at the warm-baths?'

'Would you please to come directly, sir. We found that, lying on the
table.'

He put into the physician's hand a scrap of paper. Physician looked at
it, and read his own name and address written in pencil; nothing more.
He looked closer at the writing, looked at the man, took his hat from
its peg, put the key of his door in his pocket, and they hurried away
together.

When they came to the warm-baths, all the other people belonging to that
establishment were looking out for them at the door, and running up and
down the passages. 'Request everybody else to keep back, if you please,'
said the physician aloud to the master; 'and do you take me straight to
the place, my friend,' to the messenger.

The messenger hurried before him, along a grove of little rooms,
and turning into one at the end of the grove, looked round the door.
Physician was close upon him, and looked round the door too.

There was a bath in that corner, from which the water had been hastily
drained off. Lying in it, as in a grave or sarcophagus, with a hurried
drapery of sheet and blanket thrown across it, was the body of a
heavily-made man, with an obtuse head, and coarse, mean, common
features. A sky-light had been opened to release the steam with which
the room had been filled; but it hung, condensed into water-drops,
heavily upon the walls, and heavily upon the face and figure in the
bath. The room was still hot, and the marble of the bath still warm; but
the face and figure were clammy to the touch. The white marble at the
bottom of the bath was veined with a dreadful red. On the ledge at
the side, were an empty laudanum-bottle and a tortoise-shell handled
penknife--soiled, but not with ink.

'Separation of jugular vein--death rapid--been dead at least half an
hour.' This echo of the physician's words ran through the passages
and little rooms, and through the house while he was yet straightening
himself from having bent down to reach to the bottom of the bath, and
while he was yet dabbling his hands in water; redly veining it as the
marble was veined, before it mingled into one tint.

He turned his eyes to the dress upon the sofa, and to the watch, money,
and pocket-book on the table. A folded note half buckled up in the
pocket-book, and half protruding from it, caught his observant glance.
He looked at it, touched it, pulled it a little further out from among
the leaves, said quietly, 'This is addressed to me,' and opened and read
it.

There were no directions for him to give. The people of the house knew
what to do; the proper authorities were soon brought; and they took an
equable business-like possession of the deceased, and of what had been
his property, with no greater disturbance of manner or countenance than
usually attends the winding-up of a clock. Physician was glad to walk
out into the night air--was even glad, in spite of his great experience,
to sit down upon a door-step for a little while: feeling sick and faint.

Bar was a near neighbour of his, and, when he came to the house, he saw
a light in the room where he knew his friend often sat late getting up
his work. As the light was never there when Bar was not, it gave him
assurance that Bar was not yet in bed. In fact, this busy bee had
a verdict to get to-morrow, against evidence, and was improving the
shining hours in setting snares for the gentlemen of the jury.

Physician's knock astonished Bar; but, as he immediately suspected that
somebody had come to tell him that somebody else was robbing him, or
otherwise trying to get the better of him, he came down promptly and
softly. He had been clearing his head with a lotion of cold water, as a
good preparative to providing hot water for the heads of the jury, and
had been reading with the neck of his shirt thrown wide open that he
might the more freely choke the opposite witnesses. In consequence, he
came down, looking rather wild. Seeing Physician, the least expected of
men, he looked wilder and said, 'What's the matter?'

'You asked me once what Merdle's complaint was.'

'Extraordinary answer! I know I did.'

'I told you I had not found out.'

'Yes. I know you did.'

'I have found it out.'

'My God!' said Bar, starting back, and clapping his hand upon the
other's breast. 'And so have I! I see it in your face.'

They went into the nearest room, where Physician gave him the letter to
read. He read it through half-a-dozen times. There was not much in it
as to quantity; but it made a great demand on his close and continuous
attention. He could not sufficiently give utterance to his regret that
he had not himself found a clue to this. The smallest clue, he said,
would have made him master of the case, and what a case it would have
been to have got to the bottom of!

Physician had engaged to break the intelligence in Harley Street. Bar
could not at once return to his inveiglements of the most enlightened
and remarkable jury he had ever seen in that box, with whom, he could
tell his learned friend, no shallow sophistry would go down, and no
unhappily abused professional tact and skill prevail (this was the way
he meant to begin with them); so he said he would go too, and would
loiter to and fro near the house while his friend was inside. They
walked there, the better to recover self-possession in the air; and the
wings of day were fluttering the night when Physician knocked at the
door.

A footman of rainbow hues, in the public eye, was sitting up for his
master--that is to say, was fast asleep in the kitchen over a couple
of candles and a newspaper, demonstrating the great accumulation of
mathematical odds against the probabilities of a house being set on fire
by accident When this serving man was roused, Physician had still to
await the rousing of the Chief Butler. At last that noble creature came
into the dining-room in a flannel gown and list shoes; but with his
cravat on, and a Chief Butler all over. It was morning now. Physician
had opened the shutters of one window while waiting, that he might see
the light.

'Mrs Merdle's maid must be called, and told to get Mrs Merdle up, and
prepare her as gently as she can to see me. I have dreadful news to
break to her.'

Thus Physician to the Chief Butler. The latter, who had a candle in his
hand, called his man to take it away. Then he approached the window with
dignity; looking on at Physician's news exactly as he had looked on at
the dinners in that very room.

'Mr Merdle is dead.'

'I should wish,' said the Chief Butler, 'to give a month's notice.'

'Mr Merdle has destroyed himself.'

'Sir,' said the Chief Butler, 'that is very unpleasant to the feelings
of one in my position, as calculated to awaken prejudice; and I should
wish to leave immediately.'

'If you are not shocked, are you not surprised, man?' demanded the
Physician, warmly.

The Chief Butler, erect and calm, replied in these memorable words.
'Sir, Mr Merdle never was the gentleman, and no ungentlemanly act on
Mr Merdle's part would surprise me. Is there anybody else I can send to
you, or any other directions I can give before I leave, respecting what
you would wish to be done?'

When Physician, after discharging himself of his trust up-stairs,
rejoined Bar in the street, he said no more of his interview with Mrs
Merdle than that he had not yet told her all, but that what he had told
her she had borne pretty well. Bar had devoted his leisure in the street
to the construction of a most ingenious man-trap for catching the whole
of his jury at a blow; having got that matter settled in his mind,
it was lucid on the late catastrophe, and they walked home slowly,
discussing it in every bearing. Before parting at the Physician's door,
they both looked up at the sunny morning sky, into which the smoke of a
few early fires and the breath and voices of a few early stirrers were
peacefully rising, and then looked round upon the immense city, and
said, if all those hundreds and thousands of beggared people who were
yet asleep could only know, as they two spoke, the ruin that impended
over them, what a fearful cry against one miserable soul would go up to
Heaven!

The report that the great man was dead, got about with astonishing
rapidity. At first, he was dead of all the diseases that ever were
known, and of several bran-new maladies invented with the speed of
Light to meet the demand of the occasion. He had concealed a dropsy from
infancy, he had inherited a large estate of water on the chest from his
grandfather, he had had an operation performed upon him every morning
of his life for eighteen years, he had been subject to the explosion of
important veins in his body after the manner of fireworks, he had had
something the matter with his lungs, he had had something the matter
with his heart, he had had something the matter with his brain. Five
hundred people who sat down to breakfast entirely uninformed on the
whole subject, believed before they had done breakfast, that they
privately and personally knew Physician to have said to Mr Merdle, 'You
must expect to go out, some day, like the snuff of a candle;' and that
they knew Mr Merdle to have said to Physician, 'A man can die but once.'
By about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, something the matter with the
brain, became the favourite theory against the field; and by twelve the
something had been distinctly ascertained to be 'Pressure.'

Pressure was so entirely satisfactory to the public mind, and seemed to
make everybody so comfortable, that it might have lasted all day but for
Bar's having taken the real state of the case into Court at half-past
nine. This led to its beginning to be currently whispered all over
London by about one, that Mr Merdle had killed himself. Pressure,
however, so far from being overthrown by the discovery, became a greater
favourite than ever. There was a general moralising upon Pressure, in
every street. All the people who had tried to make money and had not
been able to do it, said, There you were! You no sooner began to devote
yourself to the pursuit of wealth than you got Pressure. The idle people
improved the occasion in a similar manner. See, said they, what you
brought yourself to by work, work, work! You persisted in working, you
overdid it. Pressure came on, and you were done for! This consideration
was very potent in many quarters, but nowhere more so than among the
young clerks and partners who had never been in the slightest danger
of overdoing it. These, one and all, declared, quite piously, that they
hoped they would never forget the warning as long as they lived, and
that their conduct might be so regulated as to keep off Pressure, and
preserve them, a comfort to their friends, for many years.

But, at about the time of High 'Change, Pressure began to wane, and
appalling whispers to circulate, east, west, north, and south. At first
they were faint, and went no further than a doubt whether Mr Merdle's
wealth would be found to be as vast as had been supposed; whether there
might not be a temporary difficulty in 'realising' it; whether there
might not even be a temporary suspension (say a month or so), on the
part of the wonderful Bank. As the whispers became louder, which they
did from that time every minute, they became more threatening. He had
sprung from nothing, by no natural growth or process that any one could
account for; he had been, after all, a low, ignorant fellow; he had been
a down-looking man, and no one had ever been able to catch his eye;
he had been taken up by all sorts of people in quite an unaccountable
manner; he had never had any money of his own, his ventures had been
utterly reckless, and his expenditure had been most enormous. In steady
progression, as the day declined, the talk rose in sound and purpose.
He had left a letter at the Baths addressed to his physician, and his
physician had got the letter, and the letter would be produced at the
Inquest on the morrow, and it would fall like a thunderbolt upon the
multitude he had deluded. Numbers of men in every profession and trade
would be blighted by his insolvency; old people who had been in easy
circumstances all their lives would have no place of repentance for
their trust in him but the workhouse; legions of women and children
would have their whole future desolated by the hand of this mighty
scoundrel. Every partaker of his magnificent feasts would be seen to
have been a sharer in the plunder of innumerable homes; every servile
worshipper of riches who had helped to set him on his pedestal, would
have done better to worship the Devil point-blank. So, the talk, lashed
louder and higher by confirmation on confirmation, and by edition after
edition of the evening papers, swelled into such a roar when night came,
as might have brought one to believe that a solitary watcher on the
gallery above the Dome of St Paul's would have perceived the night air
to be laden with a heavy muttering of the name of Merdle, coupled with
every form of execration.

For by that time it was known that the late Mr Merdle's complaint
had been simply Forgery and Robbery. He, the uncouth object of such
wide-spread adulation, the sitter at great men's feasts, the roc's egg
of great ladies' assemblies, the subduer of exclusiveness, the leveller
of pride, the patron of patrons, the bargain-driver with a Minister
for Lordships of the Circumlocution Office, the recipient of more
acknowledgment within some ten or fifteen years, at most, than had been
bestowed in England upon all peaceful public benefactors, and upon
all the leaders of all the Arts and Sciences, with all their works to
testify for them, during two centuries at least--he, the shining wonder,
the new constellation to be followed by the wise men bringing gifts,
until it stopped over a certain carrion at the bottom of a bath and
disappeared--was simply the greatest Forger and the greatest Thief that
ever cheated the gallows.




CHAPTER 26. Reaping the Whirlwind


With a precursory sound of hurried breath and hurried feet, Mr Pancks
rushed into Arthur Clennam's Counting-house. The Inquest was over, the
letter was public, the Bank was broken, the other model structures of
straw had taken fire and were turned to smoke. The admired piratical
ship had blown up, in the midst of a vast fleet of ships of all rates,
and boats of all sizes; and on the deep was nothing but ruin; nothing
but burning hulls, bursting magazines, great guns self-exploded tearing
friends and neighbours to pieces, drowning men clinging to unseaworthy
spars and going down every minute, spent swimmers, floating dead, and
sharks.

The usual diligence and order of the Counting-house at the Works were
overthrown. Unopened letters and unsorted papers lay strewn about the
desk. In the midst of these tokens of prostrated energy and dismissed
hope, the master of the Counting-house stood idle in his usual place,
with his arms crossed on the desk, and his head bowed down upon them.

Mr Pancks rushed in and saw him, and stood still. In another minute, Mr
Pancks's arms were on the desk, and Mr Pancks's head was bowed down
upon them; and for some time they remained in these attitudes, idle and
silent, with the width of the little room between them.

Mr Pancks was the first to lift up his head and speak.

'I persuaded you to it, Mr Clennam. I know it. Say what you will. You
can't say more to me than I say to myself. You can't say more than I
deserve.'

'O, Pancks, Pancks!' returned Clennam, 'don't speak of deserving. What
do I myself deserve!'

'Better luck,' said Pancks.

'I,' pursued Clennam, without attending to him, 'who have ruined my
partner! Pancks, Pancks, I have ruined Doyce! The honest, self-helpful,
indefatigable old man who has worked his way all through his life;
the man who has contended against so much disappointment, and who has
brought out of it such a good and hopeful nature; the man I have felt
so much for, and meant to be so true and useful to; I have ruined
him--brought him to shame and disgrace--ruined him, ruined him!'

The agony into which the reflection wrought his mind was so distressing
to see, that Mr Pancks took hold of himself by the hair of his head, and
tore it in desperation at the spectacle.

'Reproach me!' cried Pancks. 'Reproach me, sir, or I'll do myself an
injury. Say,--You fool, you villain. Say,--Ass, how could you do it;
Beast, what did you mean by it! Catch hold of me somewhere. Say
something abusive to me!' All the time, Mr Pancks was tearing at his
tough hair in a most pitiless and cruel manner.

'If you had never yielded to this fatal mania, Pancks,' said Clennam,
more in commiseration than retaliation, 'it would have been how much
better for you, and how much better for me!'

'At me again, sir!' cried Pancks, grinding his teeth in remorse. 'At
me again!'

'If you had never gone into those accursed calculations, and brought out
your results with such abominable clearness,' groaned Clennam, 'it would
have been how much better for you, Pancks, and how much better for me!'

'At me again, sir!' exclaimed Pancks, loosening his hold of his hair;
'at me again, and again!'

Clennam, however, finding him already beginning to be pacified, had said
all he wanted to say, and more. He wrung his hand, only adding, 'Blind
leaders of the blind, Pancks! Blind leaders of the blind! But Doyce,
Doyce, Doyce; my injured partner!' That brought his head down on the
desk once more.

Their former attitudes and their former silence were once more first
encroached upon by Pancks.

'Not been to bed, sir, since it began to get about. Been high and low,
on the chance of finding some hope of saving any cinders from the fire.
All in vain. All gone. All vanished.'

'I know it,' returned Clennam, 'too well.'

Mr Pancks filled up a pause with a groan that came out of the very
depths of his soul.

'Only yesterday, Pancks,' said Arthur; 'only yesterday, Monday, I had
the fixed intention of selling, realising, and making an end of it.'

'I can't say as much for myself, sir,' returned Pancks. 'Though it's
wonderful how many people I've heard of, who were going to realise
yesterday, of all days in the three hundred and sixty-five, if it hadn't
been too late!'

His steam-like breathings, usually droll in their effect, were more
tragic than so many groans: while from head to foot, he was in that
begrimed, besmeared, neglected state, that he might have been an
authentic portrait of Misfortune which could scarcely be discerned
through its want of cleaning.

'Mr Clennam, had you laid out--everything?' He got over the break before
the last word, and also brought out the last word itself with great
difficulty.

'Everything.'

Mr Pancks took hold of his tough hair again, and gave it such a wrench
that he pulled out several prongs of it. After looking at these with an
eye of wild hatred, he put them in his pocket.

'My course,' said Clennam, brushing away some tears that had been
silently dropping down his face, 'must be taken at once. What wretched
amends I can make must be made. I must clear my unfortunate partner's
reputation. I must retain nothing for myself. I must resign to our
creditors the power of management I have so much abused, and I must work
out as much of my fault--or crime--as is susceptible of being worked out
in the rest of my days.'

'Is it impossible, sir, to tide over the present?'

'Out of the question. Nothing can be tided over now, Pancks. The sooner
the business can pass out of my hands, the better for it. There are
engagements to be met, this week, which would bring the catastrophe
before many days were over, even if I would postpone it for a single day
by going on for that space, secretly knowing what I know. All last night
I thought of what I would do; what remains is to do it.'

'Not entirely of yourself?' said Pancks, whose face was as damp as if
his steam were turning into water as fast as he dismally blew it off.
'Have some legal help.'

'Perhaps I had better.'

'Have Rugg.'

'There is not much to do. He will do it as well as another.'

'Shall I fetch Rugg, Mr Clennam?'

'If you could spare the time, I should be much obliged to you.'

Mr Pancks put on his hat that moment, and steamed away to Pentonville.
While he was gone Arthur never raised his head from the desk, but
remained in that one position.

Mr Pancks brought his friend and professional adviser, Mr Rugg, back
with him. Mr Rugg had had such ample experience, on the road, of Mr
Pancks's being at that present in an irrational state of mind, that he
opened his professional mediation by requesting that gentleman to take
himself out of the way. Mr Pancks, crushed and submissive, obeyed.

'He is not unlike what my daughter was, sir, when we began the Breach of
Promise action of Rugg and Bawkins, in which she was Plaintiff,' said
Mr Rugg. 'He takes too strong and direct an interest in the case. His
feelings are worked upon. There is no getting on, in our profession,
with feelings worked upon, sir.'

As he pulled off his gloves and put them in his hat, he saw, in a side
glance or two, that a great change had come over his client.

'I am sorry to perceive, sir,' said Mr Rugg, 'that you have been
allowing your own feelings to be worked upon. Now, pray don't, pray
don't. These losses are much to be deplored, sir, but we must look 'em
in the face.'

'If the money I have sacrificed had been all my own, Mr Rugg,' sighed Mr
Clennam, 'I should have cared far less.'

'Indeed, sir?' said Mr Rugg, rubbing his hands with a cheerful air.
'You surprise me. That's singular, sir. I have generally found, in my
experience, that it's their own money people are most particular about.
I have seen people get rid of a good deal of other people's money, and
bear it very well: very well indeed.'

With these comforting remarks, Mr Rugg seated himself on an office-stool
at the desk and proceeded to business.

'Now, Mr Clennam, by your leave, let us go into the matter. Let us see
the state of the case. The question is simple. The question is the
usual plain, straightforward, common-sense question. What can we do for
ourself? What can we do for ourself?'

'This is not the question with me, Mr Rugg,' said Arthur. 'You mistake
it in the beginning. It is, what can I do for my partner, how can I best
make reparation to him?'

'I am afraid, sir, do you know,' argued Mr Rugg persuasively, 'that you
are still allowing your feeling to be worked upon. I _don't_ like the term
"reparation," sir, except as a lever in the hands of counsel. Will you
excuse my saying that I feel it my duty to offer you the caution, that
you really must not allow your feelings to be worked upon?'

'Mr Rugg,' said Clennam, nerving himself to go through with what he
had resolved upon, and surprising that gentleman by appearing, in his
despondency, to have a settled determination of purpose; 'you give me
the impression that you will not be much disposed to adopt the course
I have made up my mind to take. If your disapproval of it should render
you unwilling to discharge such business as it necessitates, I am sorry
for it, and must seek other aid. But I will represent to you at once,
that to argue against it with me is useless.'

'Good, sir,' answered Mr Rugg, shrugging his shoulders. 'Good, sir. Since
the business is to be done by some hands, let it be done by mine. Such
was my principle in the case of Rugg and Bawkins. Such is my principle
in most cases.'

Clennam then proceeded to state to Mr Rugg his fixed resolution. He told
Mr Rugg that his partner was a man of great simplicity and integrity,
and that in all he meant to do, he was guided above all things by a
knowledge of his partner's character, and a respect for his feelings.
He explained that his partner was then absent on an enterprise of
importance, and that it particularly behoved himself publicly to accept
the blame of what he had rashly done, and publicly to exonerate his
partner from all participation in the responsibility of it, lest the
successful conduct of that enterprise should be endangered by the
slightest suspicion wrongly attaching to his partner's honour and credit
in another country. He told Mr Rugg that to clear his partner morally,
to the fullest extent, and publicly and unreservedly to declare that
he, Arthur Clennam, of that Firm, had of his own sole act, and even
expressly against his partner's caution, embarked its resources in the
swindles that had lately perished, was the only real atonement within
his power; was a better atonement to the particular man than it would be
to many men; and was therefore the atonement he had first to make. With
this view, his intention was to print a declaration to the foregoing
effect, which he had already drawn up; and, besides circulating it
among all who had dealings with the House, to advertise it in the public
papers. Concurrently with this measure (the description of which cost Mr
Rugg innumerable wry faces and great uneasiness in his limbs), he would
address a letter to all the creditors, exonerating his partner in a
solemn manner, informing them of the stoppage of the House until their
pleasure could be known and his partner communicated with, and humbly
submitting himself to their direction. If, through their consideration
for his partner's innocence, the affairs could ever be got into such
train as that the business could be profitably resumed, and its present
downfall overcome, then his own share in it should revert to his
partner, as the only reparation he could make to him in money value for
the distress and loss he had unhappily brought upon him, and he himself,
at as small a salary as he could live upon, would ask to be allowed to
serve the business as a faithful clerk.

Though Mr Rugg saw plainly there was no preventing this from being done,
still the wryness of his face and the uneasiness of his limbs so sorely
required the propitiation of a Protest, that he made one. 'I offer no
objection, sir,' said he, 'I argue no point with you. I will carry out
your views, sir; but, under protest.' Mr Rugg then stated, not without
prolixity, the heads of his protest. These were, in effect, because the
whole town, or he might say the whole country, was in the first madness
of the late discovery, and the resentment against the victims would be
very strong: those who had not been deluded being certain to wax
exceedingly wroth with them for not having been as wise as they were:
and those who had been deluded being certain to find excuses and reasons
for themselves, of which they were equally certain to see that other
sufferers were wholly devoid: not to mention the great probability of
every individual sufferer persuading himself, to his violent
indignation, that but for the example of all the other sufferers he
never would have put himself in the way of suffering. Because such a
declaration as Clennam's, made at such a time, would certainly draw down
upon him a storm of animosity, rendering it impossible to calculate on
forbearance in the creditors, or on unanimity among them; and exposing
him a solitary target to a straggling cross-fire, which might bring him
down from half-a-dozen quarters at once.

To all this Clennam merely replied that, granting the whole protest,
nothing in it lessened the force, or could lessen the force, of the
voluntary and public exoneration of his partner. He therefore, once
and for all, requested Mr Rugg's immediate aid in getting the business
despatched. Upon that, Mr Rugg fell to work; and Arthur, retaining no
property to himself but his clothes and books, and a little loose
money, placed his small private banker's-account with the papers of the
business.

The disclosure was made, and the storm raged fearfully. Thousands of
people were wildly staring about for somebody alive to heap reproaches
on; and this notable case, courting publicity, set the living somebody
so much wanted, on a scaffold. When people who had nothing to do with
the case were so sensible of its flagrancy, people who lost money by it
could scarcely be expected to deal mildly with it. Letters of reproach
and invective showered in from the creditors; and Mr Rugg, who sat upon
the high stool every day and read them all, informed his client within a
week that he feared there were writs out.

'I must take the consequences of what I have done,' said Clennam. 'The
writs will find me here.'

On the very next morning, as he was turning in Bleeding Heart Yard by
Mrs Plornish's corner, Mrs Plornish stood at the door waiting for him,
and mysteriously besought him to step into Happy Cottage. There he found
Mr Rugg.

'I thought I'd wait for you here. I wouldn't go on to the Counting-house
this morning if I was you, sir.'

'Why not, Mr Rugg?'

'There are as many as five out, to my knowledge.'

'It cannot be too soon over,' said Clennam. 'Let them take me at once.'

'Yes, but,' said Mr Rugg, getting between him and the door, 'hear
reason, hear reason. They'll take you soon enough, Mr Clennam, I don't
doubt; but, hear reason. It almost always happens, in these cases,
that some insignificant matter pushes itself in front and makes much
of itself. Now, I find there's a little one out--a mere Palace Court
jurisdiction--and I have reason to believe that a caption may be made
upon that. I wouldn't be taken upon that.'

'Why not?' asked Clennam.

'I'd be taken on a full-grown one, sir,' said Mr Rugg. 'It's as well to
keep up appearances. As your professional adviser, I should prefer your
being taken on a writ from one of the Superior Courts, if you have no
objection to do me that favour. It looks better.'

'Mr Rugg,' said Arthur, in his dejection, 'my only wish is, that it
should be over. I will go on, and take my chance.'

'Another word of reason, sir!' cried Mr Rugg. 'Now, this _is_ reason.
The other may be taste; but this is reason. If you should be taken on a
little one, sir, you would go to the Marshalsea. Now, you know what the
Marshalsea is. Very close. Excessively confined. Whereas in the King's
Bench--' Mr Rugg waved his right hand freely, as expressing abundance of
space.

'I would rather,' said Clennam, 'be taken to the Marshalsea than to any
other prison.'

'Do you say so indeed, sir?' returned Mr Rugg. 'Then this is taste, too,
and we may be walking.'

He was a little offended at first, but he soon overlooked it. They
walked through the Yard to the other end. The Bleeding Hearts were more
