possess. But society shall pay for it.'

All this he said in his companion's ear, and with his hand before his
lips.

'Even here,' he went on in the same way, 'even in this mean
drinking-shop, society pursues me. Madame defames me, and her guests
defame me. I, too, a gentleman with manners and accomplishments
to strike them dead! But the wrongs society has heaped upon me are
treasured in this breast.'

To all of which John Baptist, listening attentively to the suppressed
hoarse voice, said from time to time, 'Surely, surely!' tossing his
head and shutting his eyes, as if there were the clearest case against
society that perfect candour could make out.

'Put my shoes there,' continued Lagnier. 'Hang my cloak to dry there
by the door. Take my hat.' He obeyed each instruction, as it was given.
'And this is the bed to which society consigns me, is it? Hah. _Very_
well!'

As he stretched out his length upon it, with a ragged handkerchief
bound round his wicked head, and only his wicked head showing above the
bedclothes, John Baptist was rather strongly reminded of what had so
very nearly happened to prevent the moustache from any more going up as
it did, and the nose from any more coming down as it did.

'Shaken out of destiny's dice-box again into your company, eh? By
Heaven! So much the better for you. You'll profit by it. I shall need a
long rest. Let me sleep in the morning.'

John Baptist replied that he should sleep as long as he would, and
wishing him a happy night, put out the candle. One might have supposed
that the next proceeding of the Italian would have been to undress;
but he did exactly the reverse, and dressed himself from head to foot,
saving his shoes. When he had so done, he lay down upon his bed with
some of its coverings over him, and his coat still tied round his neck,
to get through the night.

When he started up, the Godfather Break of Day was peeping at its
namesake. He rose, took his shoes in his hand, turned the key in the
door with great caution, and crept downstairs. Nothing was astir there
but the smell of coffee, wine, tobacco, and syrups; and madame's little
counter looked ghastly enough. But he had paid madame his little note
at it over night, and wanted to see nobody--wanted nothing but to get on
his shoes and his knapsack, open the door, and run away.

He prospered in his object. No movement or voice was heard when he
opened the door; no wicked head tied up in a ragged handkerchief looked
out of the upper window. When the sun had raised his full disc above the
flat line of the horizon, and was striking fire out of the long muddy
vista of paved road with its weary avenue of little trees, a black speck
moved along the road and splashed among the flaming pools of rain-water,
which black speck was John Baptist Cavalletto running away from his
patron.




CHAPTER 12. Bleeding Heart Yard


In London itself, though in the old rustic road towards a suburb of note
where in the days of William Shakespeare, author and stage-player, there
were Royal hunting-seats--howbeit no sport is left there now but for
hunters of men--Bleeding Heart Yard was to be found; a place much
changed in feature and in fortune, yet with some relish of ancient
greatness about it. Two or three mighty stacks of chimneys, and a few
large dark rooms which had escaped being walled and subdivided out of
the recognition of their old proportions, gave the Yard a character.
It was inhabited by poor people, who set up their rest among its faded
glories, as Arabs of the desert pitch their tents among the fallen
stones of the Pyramids; but there was a family sentimental feeling
prevalent in the Yard, that it had a character.

As if the aspiring city had become puffed up in the very ground on which
it stood, the ground had so risen about Bleeding Heart Yard that you
got into it down a flight of steps which formed no part of the original
approach, and got out of it by a low gateway into a maze of shabby
streets, which went about and about, tortuously ascending to the level
again. At this end of the Yard and over the gateway, was the factory of
Daniel Doyce, often heavily beating like a bleeding heart of iron,
with the clink of metal upon metal.

The opinion of the Yard was divided respecting the derivation of its
name. The more practical of its inmates abided by the tradition of a
murder; the gentler and more imaginative inhabitants, including the
whole of the tender sex, were loyal to the legend of a young lady of
former times closely imprisoned in her chamber by a cruel father for
remaining true to her own true love, and refusing to marry the suitor he
chose for her. The legend related how that the young lady used to be
seen up at her window behind the bars, murmuring a love-lorn song of
which the burden was, 'Bleeding Heart, Bleeding Heart, bleeding away,'
until she died. It was objected by the murderous party that this Refrain
was notoriously the invention of a tambour-worker, a spinster and
romantic, still lodging in the Yard. But, forasmuch as all favourite
legends must be associated with the affections, and as many more people
fall in love than commit murder--which it may be hoped, howsoever bad we
are, will continue until the end of the world to be the dispensation
under which we shall live--the Bleeding Heart, Bleeding Heart, bleeding
away story, carried the day by a great majority. Neither party would
listen to the antiquaries who delivered learned lectures in the
neighbourhood, showing the Bleeding Heart to have been the heraldic
cognisance of the old family to whom the property had once belonged.
And, considering that the hour-glass they turned from year to year was
filled with the earthiest and coarsest sand, the Bleeding Heart Yarders
had reason enough for objecting to be despoiled of the one little golden
grain of poetry that sparkled in it.

Down in to the Yard, by way of the steps, came Daniel Doyce, Mr Meagles,
and Clennam. Passing along the Yard, and between the open doors on
either hand, all abundantly garnished with light children nursing heavy
ones, they arrived at its opposite boundary, the gateway. Here Arthur
Clennam stopped to look about him for the domicile of Plornish,
plasterer, whose name, according to the custom of Londoners, Daniel
Doyce had never seen or heard of to that hour.

It was plain enough, nevertheless, as Little Dorrit had said; over a
lime-splashed gateway in the corner, within which Plornish kept a ladder
and a barrel or two. The last house in Bleeding Heart Yard which she
had described as his place of habitation, was a large house, let off to
various tenants; but Plornish ingeniously hinted that he lived in the
parlour, by means of a painted hand under his name, the forefinger of
which hand (on which the artist had depicted a ring and a most elaborate
nail of the genteelest form) referred all inquirers to that apartment.

Parting from his companions, after arranging another meeting with
Mr Meagles, Clennam went alone into the entry, and knocked with his
knuckles at the parlour-door. It was opened presently by a woman with
a child in her arms, whose unoccupied hand was hastily rearranging the
upper part of her dress. This was Mrs Plornish, and this maternal
action was the action of Mrs Plornish during a large part of her waking
existence.

Was Mr Plornish at home? 'Well, sir,' said Mrs Plornish, a civil woman,
'not to deceive you, he's gone to look for a job.'

'Not to deceive you' was a method of speech with Mrs Plornish. She would
deceive you, under any circumstances, as little as might be; but she had
a trick of answering in this provisional form.

'Do you think he will be back soon, if I wait for him?'

'I have been expecting him,' said Mrs Plornish, 'this half an hour, at
any minute of time. Walk in, sir.'

Arthur entered the rather dark and close parlour (though it was lofty too),
and sat down in the chair she placed for him.

'Not to deceive you, sir, I notice it,' said Mrs Plornish, 'and I take
it kind of you.'

He was at a loss to understand what she meant; and by expressing as much
in his looks, elicited her explanation.

'It ain't many that comes into a poor place, that deems it worth their
while to move their hats,' said Mrs Plornish. 'But people think more of
it than people think.'

Clennam returned, with an uncomfortable feeling in so very slight a
courtesy being unusual, Was that all! And stooping down to pinch the
cheek of another young child who was sitting on the floor, staring at
him, asked Mrs Plornish how old that fine boy was?

'Four year just turned, sir,' said Mrs Plornish. 'He _is_ a fine little
fellow, ain't he, sir? But this one is rather sickly.' She tenderly
hushed the baby in her arms, as she said it. 'You wouldn't mind my
asking if it happened to be a job as you was come about, sir, would
you?' asked Mrs Plornish wistfully.

She asked it so anxiously, that if he had been in possession of any
kind of tenement, he would have had it plastered a foot deep rather
than answer No. But he was obliged to answer No; and he saw a shade of
disappointment on her face, as she checked a sigh, and looked at the
low fire. Then he saw, also, that Mrs Plornish was a young woman, made
somewhat slatternly in herself and her belongings by poverty; and so
dragged at by poverty and the children together, that their united
forces had already dragged her face into wrinkles.

'All such things as jobs,' said Mrs Plornish, 'seems to me to have gone
underground, they do indeed.' (Herein Mrs Plornish limited her remark to
the plastering trade, and spoke without reference to the Circumlocution
Office and the Barnacle Family.)

'Is it so difficult to get work?' asked Arthur Clennam.

'Plornish finds it so,' she returned. 'He is quite unfortunate. Really
he is.'

Really he was. He was one of those many wayfarers on the road of life,
who seem to be afflicted with supernatural corns, rendering it
impossible for them to keep up even with their lame competitors. A
willing, working, soft hearted, not hard-headed fellow, Plornish took
his fortune as smoothly as could be expected; but it was a rough one. It
so rarely happened that anybody seemed to want him, it was such an
exceptional case when his powers were in any request, that his misty
mind could not make out how it happened. He took it as it came,
therefore; he tumbled into all kinds of difficulties, and tumbled out of
them; and, by tumbling through life, got himself considerably bruised.

'It's not for want of looking after jobs, I am sure,' said Mrs Plornish,
lifting up her eyebrows, and searching for a solution of the problem
between the bars of the grate; 'nor yet for want of working at them when
they are to be got. No one ever heard my husband complain of work.'

Somehow or other, this was the general misfortune of Bleeding Heart
Yard. From time to time there were public complaints, pathetically
going about, of labour being scarce--which certain people seemed to take
extraordinarily ill, as though they had an absolute right to it on their
own terms--but Bleeding Heart Yard, though as willing a Yard as any in
Britain, was never the better for the demand. That high old family, the
Barnacles, had long been too busy with their great principle to look
into the matter; and indeed the matter had nothing to do with their
watchfulness in out-generalling all other high old families except the
Stiltstalkings.

While Mrs Plornish spoke in these words of her absent lord, her lord
returned. A smooth-cheeked, fresh-coloured, sandy-whiskered man of
thirty. Long in the legs, yielding at the knees, foolish in the face,
flannel-jacketed, lime-whitened.

'This is Plornish, sir.'

'I came,' said Clennam, rising, 'to beg the favour of a little
conversation with you on the subject of the Dorrit family.'

Plornish became suspicious. Seemed to scent a creditor. Said, 'Ah, yes.
Well. He didn't know what satisfaction _he_ could give any gentleman,
respecting that family. What might it be about, now?'

'I know you better,' said Clennam, smiling, 'than you suppose.'

Plornish observed, not smiling in return, And yet he hadn't the pleasure
of being acquainted with the gentleman, neither.

'No,' said Arthur, 'I know your kind offices at second hand, but on the
best authority; through Little Dorrit.--I mean,' he explained, 'Miss
Dorrit.'

'Mr Clennam, is it? Oh! I've heard of you, Sir.'

'And I of you,' said Arthur.

'Please to sit down again, Sir, and consider yourself welcome.--Why,
yes,' said Plornish, taking a chair, and lifting the elder child upon
his knee, that he might have the moral support of speaking to a stranger
over his head, 'I have been on the wrong side of the Lock myself, and
in that way we come to know Miss Dorrit. Me and my wife, we are well
acquainted with Miss Dorrit.'

'Intimate!' cried Mrs Plornish. Indeed, she was so proud of the
acquaintance, that she had awakened some bitterness of spirit in the
Yard by magnifying to an enormous amount the sum for which Miss Dorrit's
father had become insolvent. The Bleeding Hearts resented her claiming
to know people of such distinction.

'It was her father that I got acquainted with first. And through getting
acquainted with him, you see--why--I got acquainted with her,' said
Plornish tautologically.

'I see.'

'Ah! And there's manners! There's polish! There's a gentleman to have
run to seed in the Marshalsea jail! Why, perhaps you are not aware,'
said Plornish, lowering his voice, and speaking with a perverse
admiration of what he ought to have pitied or despised, 'not aware that
Miss Dorrit and her sister dursn't let him know that they work for a
living. No!' said Plornish, looking with a ridiculous triumph first at
his wife, and then all round the room. 'Dursn't let him know it, they
dursn't!'

'Without admiring him for that,' Clennam quietly observed, 'I am very
sorry for him.' The remark appeared to suggest to Plornish, for the
first time, that it might not be a very fine trait of character after
all. He pondered about it for a moment, and gave it up.

'As to me,' he resumed, 'certainly Mr Dorrit is as affable with me, I
am sure, as I can possibly expect. Considering the differences and
distances betwixt us, more so. But it's Miss Dorrit that we were
speaking of.'

'True. Pray how did you introduce her at my mother's!'

Mr Plornish picked a bit of lime out of his whisker, put it between his
lips, turned it with his tongue like a sugar-plum, considered, found
himself unequal to the task of lucid explanation, and appealing to his
wife, said, 'Sally, _you_ may as well mention how it was, old woman.'

'Miss Dorrit,' said Sally, hushing the baby from side to side, and
laying her chin upon the little hand as it tried to disarrange the gown
again, 'came here one afternoon with a bit of writing, telling that
how she wished for needlework, and asked if it would be considered any
ill-conwenience in case she was to give her address here.' (Plornish
repeated, her address here, in a low voice, as if he were making
responses at church.) 'Me and Plornish says, No, Miss Dorrit, no
ill-conwenience,' (Plornish repeated, no ill-conwenience,) 'and she
wrote it in, according. Which then me and Plornish says, Ho Miss
Dorrit!' (Plornish repeated, Ho Miss Dorrit.) 'Have you thought of
copying it three or four times, as the way to make it known in more
places than one? No, says Miss Dorrit, I have not, but I will. She
copied it out according, on this table, in a sweet writing, and
Plornish, he took it where he worked, having a job just then,' (Plornish
repeated job just then,) 'and likewise to the landlord of the Yard;
through which it was that Mrs Clennam first happened to employ Miss
Dorrit.' Plornish repeated, employ Miss Dorrit; and Mrs Plornish having
come to an end, feigned to bite the fingers of the little hand as she
kissed it.

'The landlord of the Yard,' said Arthur Clennam, 'is--'

'He is Mr Casby, by name, he is,' said Plornish, 'and Pancks, he
collects the rents. That,' added Mr Plornish, dwelling on the subject
with a slow thoughtfulness that appeared to have no connection with any
specific object, and to lead him nowhere, 'that is about what _they_ are,
you may believe me or not, as you think proper.'

'Ay?' returned Clennam, thoughtful in his turn. 'Mr Casby, too! An old
acquaintance of mine, long ago!'

Mr Plornish did not see his road to any comment on this fact, and made
none. As there truly was no reason why he should have the least interest
in it, Arthur Clennam went on to the present purport of his visit;
namely, to make Plornish the instrument of effecting Tip's release,
with as little detriment as possible to the self-reliance and
self-helpfulness of the young man, supposing him to possess any remnant
of those qualities: without doubt a very wide stretch of supposition.
Plornish, having been made acquainted with the cause of action from the
Defendant's own mouth, gave Arthur to understand that the Plaintiff
was a 'Chaunter'--meaning, not a singer of anthems, but a seller of
horses--and that he (Plornish) considered that ten shillings in the
pound 'would settle handsome,' and that more would be a waste of money.
The Principal and instrument soon drove off together to a stable-yard in
High Holborn, where a remarkably fine grey gelding, worth, at the lowest
figure, seventy-five guineas (not taking into account the value of the
shot he had been made to swallow for the improvement of his form), was
to be parted with for a twenty-pound note, in consequence of his having
run away last week with Mrs Captain Barbary of Cheltenham, who wasn't up
to a horse of his courage, and who, in mere spite, insisted on selling
him for that ridiculous sum: or, in other words, on giving him away.
Plornish, going up this yard alone and leaving his Principal outside,
found a gentleman with tight drab legs, a rather old hat, a little
hooked stick, and a blue neckerchief (Captain Maroon of Gloucestershire,
a private friend of Captain Barbary); who happened to be there, in
a friendly way, to mention these little circumstances concerning the
remarkably fine grey gelding to any real judge of a horse and quick
snapper-up of a good thing, who might look in at that address as per
advertisement. This gentleman, happening also to be the Plaintiff in the
Tip case, referred Mr Plornish to his solicitor, and declined to treat
with Mr Plornish, or even to endure his presence in the yard, unless
he appeared there with a twenty-pound note: in which case only, the
gentleman would augur from appearances that he meant business, and
might be induced to talk to him. On this hint, Mr Plornish retired
to communicate with his Principal, and presently came back with the
required credentials. Then said Captain Maroon, 'Now, how much time do
you want to make the other twenty in? Now, I'll give you a month.' Then
said Captain Maroon, when that wouldn't suit, 'Now, I'll tell what I'll
do with you. You shall get me a good bill at four months, made payable
at a banking-house, for the other twenty!' Then said Captain Maroon,
when _that_ wouldn't suit, 'Now, come; Here's the last I've got to say
to you. You shall give me another ten down, and I'll run my pen clean
through it.' Then said Captain Maroon when _that_ wouldn't suit, 'Now,
I'll tell you what it is, and this shuts it up; he has used me bad, but
I'll let him off for another five down and a bottle of wine; and if you
mean done, say done, and if you don't like it, leave it.' Finally said
Captain Maroon, when _that_ wouldn't suit either, 'Hand over, then!'--And
in consideration of the first offer, gave a receipt in full and
discharged the prisoner.

'Mr Plornish,' said Arthur, 'I trust to you, if you please, to keep my
secret. If you will undertake to let the young man know that he is free,
and to tell him that you were employed to compound for the debt by
some one whom you are not at liberty to name, you will not only do me a
service, but may do him one, and his sister also.'

'The last reason, sir,' said Plornish, 'would be quite sufficient. Your
wishes shall be attended to.'

'A Friend has obtained his discharge, you can say if you please. A
Friend who hopes that for his sister's sake, if for no one else's, he
will make good use of his liberty.'

'Your wishes, sir, shall be attended to.'

'And if you will be so good, in your better knowledge of the family, as
to communicate freely with me, and to point out to me any means by which
you think I may be delicately and really useful to Little Dorrit, I
shall feel under an obligation to you.'

'Don't name it, sir,' returned Plornish, 'it'll be ekally a pleasure an
a--it'l be ekally a pleasure and a--' Finding himself unable to balance
his sentence after two efforts, Mr Plornish wisely dropped it. He took
Clennam's card and appropriate pecuniary compliment.

He was earnest to finish his commission at once, and his Principal
was in the same mind. So his Principal offered to set him down at the
Marshalsea Gate, and they drove in that direction over Blackfriars
Bridge. On the way, Arthur elicited from his new friend a confused
summary of the interior life of Bleeding Heart Yard. They was all hard
up there, Mr Plornish said, uncommon hard up, to be sure. Well, he
couldn't say how it was; he didn't know as anybody _could_ say how it
was; all he know'd was, that so it was. When a man felt, on his own
back and in his own belly, that poor he was, that man (Mr Plornish gave
it as his decided belief) know'd well that he was poor somehow or
another, and you couldn't talk it out of him, no more than you could
talk Beef into him. Then you see, some people as was better off said,
and a good many such people lived pretty close up to the mark themselves
if not beyond it so he'd heerd, that they was 'improvident' (that was
the favourite word) down the Yard. For instance, if they see a man with
his wife and children going to Hampton Court in a Wan, perhaps once in a
year, they says, 'Hallo! I thought you was poor, my improvident friend!'
Why, Lord, how hard it was upon a man! What was a man to do? He couldn't
go mollancholy mad, and even if he did, you wouldn't be the better for
it. In Mr Plornish's judgment you would be the worse for it. Yet you
seemed to want to make a man mollancholy mad. You was always at it--if
not with your right hand, with your left. What was they a doing in the
Yard? Why, take a look at 'em and see. There was the girls and their
mothers a working at their sewing, or their shoe-binding, or their
trimming, or their waistcoat making, day and night and night and day,
and not more than able to keep body and soul together after all--often
not so much. There was people of pretty well all sorts of trades you
could name, all wanting to work, and yet not able to get it. There was
old people, after working all their lives, going and being shut up in
the workhouse, much worse fed and lodged and treated altogether,
than--Mr Plornish said manufacturers, but appeared to mean malefactors.
Why, a man didn't know where to turn himself for a crumb of comfort. As
to who was to blame for it, Mr Plornish didn't know who was to blame for
it. He could tell you who suffered, but he couldn't tell you whose fault
it was. It wasn't _his_ place to find out, and who'd mind what he said,
if he did find out? He only know'd that it wasn't put right by them what
undertook that line of business, and that it didn't come right of
itself. And, in brief, his illogical opinion was, that if you couldn't
do nothing for him, you had better take nothing from him for doing of
it; so far as he could make out, that was about what it come to. Thus,
in a prolix, gently-growling, foolish way, did Plornish turn the tangled
skein of his estate about and about, like a blind man who was trying to
find some beginning or end to it; until they reached the prison gate.
There, he left his Principal alone; to wonder, as he rode away, how many
thousand Plornishes there might be within a day or two's journey of the
Circumlocution Office, playing sundry curious variations on the same
tune, which were not known by ear in that glorious institution.



CHAPTER 13. Patriarchal


The mention of Mr Casby again revived in Clennam's memory the
smouldering embers of curiosity and interest which Mrs Flintwinch had
fanned on the night of his arrival. Flora Casby had been the beloved of
his boyhood; and Flora was the daughter and only child of wooden-headed
old Christopher (so he was still occasionally spoken of by some
irreverent spirits who had had dealings with him, and in whom
familiarity had bred its proverbial result perhaps), who was reputed to
be rich in weekly tenants, and to get a good quantity of blood out of
the stones of several unpromising courts and alleys.

After some days of inquiry and research, Arthur Clennam became convinced
that the case of the Father of the Marshalsea was indeed a hopeless one,
and sorrowfully resigned the idea of helping him to freedom again. He
had no hopeful inquiry to make at present, concerning Little Dorrit
either; but he argued with himself that it might--for anything he
knew--it might be serviceable to the poor child, if he renewed this
acquaintance. It is hardly necessary to add that beyond all doubt he
would have presented himself at Mr Casby's door, if there had been no
Little Dorrit in existence; for we all know how we all deceive
ourselves--that is to say, how people in general, our profounder selves
excepted, deceive themselves--as to motives of action.

With a comfortable impression upon him, and quite an honest one in its
way, that he was still patronising Little Dorrit in doing what had no
reference to her, he found himself one afternoon at the corner of Mr
Casby's street. Mr Casby lived in a street in the Gray's Inn Road, which
had set off from that thoroughfare with the intention of running at one
heat down into the valley, and up again to the top of Pentonville Hill;
but which had run itself out of breath in twenty yards, and had stood
still ever since. There is no such place in that part now; but it
remained there for many years, looking with a baulked countenance at
the wilderness patched with unfruitful gardens and pimpled with eruptive
summerhouses, that it had meant to run over in no time.

'The house,' thought Clennam, as he crossed to the door, 'is as little
changed as my mother's, and looks almost as gloomy. But the likeness
ends outside. I know its staid repose within. The smell of its jars of
old rose-leaves and lavender seems to come upon me even here.'

When his knock at the bright brass knocker of obsolete shape brought a
woman-servant to the door, those faded scents in truth saluted him like
wintry breath that had a faint remembrance in it of the bygone spring.
He stepped into the sober, silent, air-tight house--one might have
fancied it to have been stifled by Mutes in the Eastern manner--and the
door, closing again, seemed to shut out sound and motion. The
furniture was formal, grave, and quaker-like, but well-kept; and had as
prepossessing an aspect as anything, from a human creature to a wooden
stool, that is meant for much use and is preserved for little, can ever
wear. There was a grave clock, ticking somewhere up the staircase; and
there was a songless bird in the same direction, pecking at his cage, as
if he were ticking too. The parlour-fire ticked in the grate. There was
only one person on the parlour-hearth, and the loud watch in his pocket
ticked audibly.

The servant-maid had ticked the two words 'Mr Clennam' so softly that
she had not been heard; and he consequently stood, within the door
she had closed, unnoticed. The figure of a man advanced in life, whose
smooth grey eyebrows seemed to move to the ticking as the fire-light
flickered on them, sat in an arm-chair, with his list shoes on the
rug, and his thumbs slowly revolving over one another. This was old
Christopher Casby--recognisable at a glance--as unchanged in twenty
years and upward as his own solid furniture--as little touched by the
influence of the varying seasons as the old rose-leaves and old lavender
in his porcelain jars.

Perhaps there never was a man, in this troublesome world, so troublesome
for the imagination to picture as a boy. And yet he had changed very
little in his progress through life. Confronting him, in the room in
which he sat, was a boy's portrait, which anybody seeing him would have
identified as Master Christopher Casby, aged ten: though disguised with
a haymaking rake, for which he had had, at any time, as much taste or
use as for a diving-bell; and sitting (on one of his own legs) upon a
bank of violets, moved to precocious contemplation by the spire of a
village church. There was the same smooth face and forehead, the same
calm blue eye, the same placid air. The shining bald head, which looked
so very large because it shone so much; and the long grey hair at its
sides and back, like floss silk or spun glass, which looked so very
benevolent because it was never cut; were not, of course, to be seen in
the boy as in the old man. Nevertheless, in the Seraphic creature with
the haymaking rake, were clearly to be discerned the rudiments of the
Patriarch with the list shoes.

Patriarch was the name which many people delighted to give him.
Various old ladies in the neighbourhood spoke of him as The Last of the
Patriarchs. So grey, so slow, so quiet, so impassionate, so very bumpy
in the head, Patriarch was the word for him. He had been accosted in the
streets, and respectfully solicited to become a Patriarch for painters
and for sculptors; with so much importunity, in sooth, that it would
appear to be beyond the Fine Arts to remember the points of a Patriarch,
or to invent one. Philanthropists of both sexes had asked who he was,
and on being informed, 'Old Christopher Casby, formerly Town-agent to
Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle,' had cried in a rapture of disappointment,
'Oh! why, with that head, is he not a benefactor to his species! Oh!
why, with that head, is he not a father to the orphan and a friend to
the friendless!' With that head, however, he remained old Christopher
Casby, proclaimed by common report rich in house property; and with that
head, he now sat in his silent parlour. Indeed it would be the height of
unreason to expect him to be sitting there without that head.

Arthur Clennam moved to attract his attention, and the grey eyebrows
turned towards him.

'I beg your pardon,' said Clennam, 'I fear you did not hear me
announced?'

'No, sir, I did not. Did you wish to see me, sir?'

'I wished to pay my respects.'

Mr Casby seemed a feather's weight disappointed by the last words,
having perhaps prepared himself for the visitor's wishing to pay
something else. 'Have I the pleasure, sir,' he proceeded--'take a chair,
if you please--have I the pleasure of knowing--? Ah! truly, yes, I think
I have! I believe I am not mistaken in supposing that I am acquainted
with those features? I think I address a gentleman of whose return to
this country I was informed by Mr Flintwinch?'

'That is your present visitor.'

'Really! Mr Clennam?'

'No other, Mr Casby.'

'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. How have you been since we met?'

Without thinking it worth while to explain that in the course of some
quarter of a century he had experienced occasional slight fluctuations
in his health and spirits, Clennam answered generally that he had never
been better, or something equally to the purpose; and shook hands with
the possessor of 'that head' as it shed its patriarchal light upon him.

'We are older, Mr Clennam,' said Christopher Casby.

'We are--not younger,' said Clennam. After this wise remark he felt that
he was scarcely shining with brilliancy, and became aware that he was
nervous.

'And your respected father,' said Mr Casby, 'is no more! I was grieved
to hear it, Mr Clennam, I was grieved.'

Arthur replied in the usual way that he felt infinitely obliged to him.

'There was a time,' said Mr Casby, 'when your parents and myself were
not on friendly terms. There was a little family misunderstanding among
us. Your respected mother was rather jealous of her son, maybe; when I
say her son, I mean your worthy self, your worthy self.'

His smooth face had a bloom upon it like ripe wall-fruit. What with
his blooming face, and that head, and his blue eyes, he seemed to be
delivering sentiments of rare wisdom and virtue. In like manner, his
physiognomical expression seemed to teem with benignity. Nobody could
have said where the wisdom was, or where the virtue was, or where the
benignity was; but they all seemed to be somewhere about him.

'Those times, however,' pursued Mr Casby, 'are past and gone, past and
gone. I do myself the pleasure of making a visit to your respected
mother occasionally, and of admiring the fortitude and strength of mind
with which she bears her trials, bears her trials.'

When he made one of these little repetitions, sitting with his hands
crossed before him, he did it with his head on one side, and a gentle
smile, as if he had something in his thoughts too sweetly profound to be
put into words. As if he denied himself the pleasure of uttering it,
lest he should soar too high; and his meekness therefore preferred to be
unmeaning.

'I have heard that you were kind enough on one of those occasions,' said
Arthur, catching at the opportunity as it drifted past him, 'to mention
Little Dorrit to my mother.'

'Little--? Dorrit? That's the seamstress who was mentioned to me by a
small tenant of mine? Yes, yes. Dorrit? That's the name. Ah, yes, yes!
You call her Little Dorrit?'

No road in that direction. Nothing came of the cross-cut. It led no
further.

'My daughter Flora,' said Mr Casby, 'as you may have heard probably, Mr
Clennam, was married and established in life, several years ago. She
had the misfortune to lose her husband when she had been married a few
months. She resides with me again. She will be glad to see you, if you
will permit me to let her know that you are here.'

'By all means,' returned Clennam. 'I should have preferred the request,
if your kindness had not anticipated me.'

Upon this Mr Casby rose up in his list shoes, and with a slow, heavy
step (he was of an elephantine build), made for the door. He had a long
wide-skirted bottle-green coat on, and a bottle-green pair of trousers,
and a bottle-green waistcoat. The Patriarchs were not dressed in
bottle-green broadcloth, and yet his clothes looked patriarchal.

He had scarcely left the room, and allowed the ticking to become audible
again, when a quick hand turned a latchkey in the house-door, opened it,
and shut it. Immediately afterwards, a quick and eager short dark man
came into the room with so much way upon him that he was within a foot
of Clennam before he could stop.

'Halloa!' he said.

Clennam saw no reason why he should not say 'Halloa!' too.

'What's the matter?' said the short dark man.

'I have not heard that anything is the matter,' returned Clennam.

'Where's Mr Casby?' asked the short dark man, looking about.

'He will be here directly, if you want him.'

'_I_ want him?' said the short dark man. 'Don't you?'

This elicited a word or two of explanation from Clennam, during the
delivery of which the short dark man held his breath and looked at him.
He was dressed in black and rusty iron grey; had jet black beads of
eyes; a scrubby little black chin; wiry black hair striking out from his
head in prongs, like forks or hair-pins; and a complexion that was very
dingy by nature, or very dirty by art, or a compound of nature and art.
He had dirty hands and dirty broken nails, and looked as if he had been
in the coals; he was in a perspiration, and snorted and sniffed and
puffed and blew, like a little labouring steam-engine.

'Oh!' said he, when Arthur told him how he came to be there. 'Very well.
That's right. If he should ask for Pancks, will you be so good as to say
that Pancks is come in?' And so, with a snort and a puff, he worked out
by another door.

Now, in the old days at home, certain audacious doubts respecting the
last of the Patriarchs, which were afloat in the air, had, by some
forgotten means, come in contact with Arthur's sensorium. He was aware
of motes and specks of suspicion in the atmosphere of that time; seen
through which medium, Christopher Casby was a mere Inn signpost, without
any Inn--an invitation to rest and be thankful, when there was no place
to put up at, and nothing whatever to be thankful for. He knew that some
of these specks even represented Christopher as capable of harbouring
designs in 'that head,' and as being a crafty impostor. Other motes
there were which showed him as a heavy, selfish, drifting Booby, who,
having stumbled, in the course of his unwieldy jostlings against other
men, on the discovery that to get through life with ease and credit,
he had but to hold his tongue, keep the bald part of his head well
polished, and leave his hair alone, had had just cunning enough to seize
the idea and stick to it. It was said that his being town-agent to
Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle was referable, not to his having the least
business capacity, but to his looking so supremely benignant that nobody
could suppose the property screwed or jobbed under such a man; also,
that for similar reasons he now got more money out of his own wretched
lettings, unquestioned, than anybody with a less nobby and less shining
crown could possibly have done. In a word, it was represented (Clennam
called to mind, alone in the ticking parlour) that many people select
their models, much as the painters, just now mentioned, select theirs;
and that, whereas in the Royal Academy some evil old ruffian of a
Dog-stealer will annually be found embodying all the cardinal virtues,
on account of his eyelashes, or his chin, or his legs (thereby planting
thorns of confusion in the breasts of the more observant students of
nature), so, in the great social Exhibition, accessories are often
accepted in lieu of the internal character.

Calling these things to mind, and ranging Mr Pancks in a row with them,
Arthur Clennam leaned this day to the opinion, without quite deciding
on it, that the last of the Patriarchs was the drifting Booby aforesaid,
with the one idea of keeping the bald part of his head highly polished:
and that, much as an unwieldy ship in the Thames river may sometimes be
seen heavily driving with the tide, broadside on, stern first, in its
own way and in the way of everything else, though making a great show
of navigation, when all of a sudden, a little coaly steam-tug will bear
down upon it, take it in tow, and bustle off with it; similarly the
cumbrous Patriarch had been taken in tow by the snorting Pancks, and was
now following in the wake of that dingy little craft.

The return of Mr Casby with his daughter Flora, put an end to these
meditations. Clennam's eyes no sooner fell upon the subject of his old
passion than it shivered and broke to pieces.

Most men will be found sufficiently true to themselves to be true to
an old idea. It is no proof of an inconstant mind, but exactly the
opposite, when the idea will not bear close comparison with the reality,
and the contrast is a fatal shock to it. Such was Clennam's case. In his
youth he had ardently loved this woman, and had heaped upon her all the
locked-up wealth of his affection and imagination. That wealth had been,
in his desert home, like Robinson Crusoe's money; exchangeable with no
one, lying idle in the dark to rust, until he poured it out for her.
Ever since that memorable time, though he had, until the night of his
arrival, as completely dismissed her from any association with his
Present or Future as if she had been dead (which she might easily
have been for anything he knew), he had kept the old fancy of the Past
unchanged, in its old sacred place. And now, after all, the last of the
Patriarchs coolly walked into the parlour, saying in effect, 'Be good
enough to throw it down and dance upon it. This is Flora.'

Flora, always tall, had grown to be very broad too, and short of breath;
but that was not much. Flora, whom he had left a lily, had become a
peony; but that was not much. Flora, who had seemed enchanting in all
she said and thought, was diffuse and silly. That was much. Flora, who
had been spoiled and artless long ago, was determined to be spoiled and
artless now. That was a fatal blow.

This is Flora!

'I am sure,' giggled Flora, tossing her head with a caricature of
her girlish manner, such as a mummer might have presented at her own
funeral, if she had lived and died in classical antiquity, 'I am ashamed
to see Mr Clennam, I am a mere fright, I know he'll find me fearfully
changed, I am actually an old woman, it's shocking to be found out, it's
really shocking!'

He assured her that she was just what he had expected and that time had
not stood still with himself.

'Oh! But with a gentleman it's so different and really you look so
amazingly well that you have no right to say anything of the kind,
while, as to me, you know--oh!' cried Flora with a little scream, 'I am
dreadful!'

The Patriarch, apparently not yet understanding his own part in the
drama under representation, glowed with vacant serenity.

'But if we talk of not having changed,' said Flora, who, whatever
she said, never once came to a full stop, 'look at Papa, is not Papa
precisely what he was when you went away, isn't it cruel and unnatural
of Papa to be such a reproach to his own child, if we go on in this way
much longer people who don't know us will begin to suppose that I am
Papa's Mama!'

That must be a long time hence, Arthur considered.

'Oh Mr Clennam you insincerest of creatures,' said Flora, 'I perceive
already you have not lost your old way of paying compliments, your old
way when you used to pretend to be so sentimentally struck you know--at
least I don't mean that, I--oh I don't know what I mean!' Here Flora
tittered confusedly, and gave him one of her old glances.

The Patriarch, as if he now began to perceive that his part in the piece
was to get off the stage as soon as might be, rose, and went to the door
by which Pancks had worked out, hailing that Tug by name. He received
an answer from some little Dock beyond, and was towed out of sight
directly.

'You mustn't think of going yet,' said Flora--Arthur had looked at his
hat, being in a ludicrous dismay, and not knowing what to do: 'you could
never be so unkind as to think of going, Arthur--I mean Mr Arthur--or I
suppose Mr Clennam would be far more proper--but I am sure I don't know
what I am saying--without a word about the dear old days gone for ever,
when I come to think of it I dare say it would be much better not to
speak of them and it's highly probable that you have some much more
agreeable engagement and pray let Me be the last person in the world
to interfere with it though there _was_ a time, but I am running into
nonsense again.'

Was it possible that Flora could have been such a chatterer in the
days she referred to? Could there have been anything like her present
disjointed volubility in the fascinations that had captivated him?

'Indeed I have little doubt,' said Flora, running on with astonishing
speed, and pointing her conversation with nothing but commas, and very
few of them, 'that you are married to some Chinese lady, being in China
so long and being in business and naturally desirous to settle and
extend your connection nothing was more likely than that you should
propose to a Chinese lady and nothing was more natural I am sure than
that the Chinese lady should accept you and think herself very well off
too, I only hope she's not a Pagodian dissenter.'

'I am not,' returned Arthur, smiling in spite of himself, 'married to
any lady, Flora.'

'Oh good gracious me I hope you never kept yourself a bachelor so long
on my account!' tittered Flora; 'but of course you never did why should
you, pray don't answer, I don't know where I'm running to, oh do tell me
something about the Chinese ladies whether their eyes are really so long
and narrow always putting me in mind of mother-of-pearl fish at cards
and do they really wear tails down their back and plaited too or is
it only the men, and when they pull their hair so very tight off their
foreheads don't they hurt themselves, and why do they stick little bells
all over their bridges and temples and hats and things or don't they
really do it?' Flora gave him another of her old glances. Instantly she
went on again, as if he had spoken in reply for some time.

'Then it's all true and they really do! good gracious Arthur!--pray
excuse me--old habit--Mr Clennam far more proper--what a country to live
in for so long a time, and with so many lanterns and umbrellas too how
very dark and wet the climate ought to be and no doubt actually is, and
the sums of money that must be made by those two trades where everybody
carries them and hangs them everywhere, the little shoes too and the
feet screwed back in infancy is quite surprising, what a traveller you
are!'

In his ridiculous distress, Clennam received another of the old glances
without in the least knowing what to do with it.

'Dear dear,' said Flora, 'only to think of the changes at home
Arthur--cannot overcome it, and seems so natural, Mr Clennam far more
proper--since you became familiar with the Chinese customs and language
which I am persuaded you speak like a Native if not better for you were
always quick and clever though immensely difficult no doubt, I am sure
the tea chests alone would kill me if I tried, such changes Arthur--I
am doing it again, seems so natural, most improper--as no one could have
believed, who could have ever imagined Mrs Finching when I can't imagine
it myself!'

'Is that your married name?' asked Arthur, struck, in the midst of all
this, by a certain warmth of heart that expressed itself in her tone
when she referred, however oddly, to the youthful relation in which they
had stood to one another. 'Finching?'

'Finching oh yes isn't it a dreadful name, but as Mr F. said when he
proposed to me which he did seven times and handsomely consented I must
say to be what he used to call on liking twelve months, after all, he
wasn't answerable for it and couldn't help it could he, Excellent man,
not at all like you but excellent man!'

Flora had at last talked herself out of breath for one moment. One
moment; for she recovered breath in the act of raising a minute corner
of her pocket-handkerchief to her eye, as a tribute to the ghost of the
departed Mr F., and began again.

'No one could dispute, Arthur--Mr Clennam--that it's quite right you
should be formally friendly to me under the altered circumstances and
indeed you couldn't be anything else, at least I suppose not you ought
to know, but I can't help recalling that there _was_ a time when things
were very different.'

'My dear Mrs Finching,' Arthur began, struck by the good tone again.

'Oh not that nasty ugly name, say Flora!'

'Flora. I assure you, Flora, I am happy in seeing you once more, and in
finding that, like me, you have not forgotten the old foolish dreams,
when we saw all before us in the light of our youth and hope.'

'You don't seem so,' pouted Flora, 'you take it very coolly, but
however I know you are disappointed in me, I suppose the Chinese
ladies--Mandarinesses if you call them so--are the cause or perhaps I am
the cause myself, it's just as likely.'

'No, no,' Clennam entreated, 'don't say that.'

'Oh I must you know,' said Flora, in a positive tone, 'what nonsense not
to, I know I am not what you expected, I know that very well.'

In the midst of her rapidity, she had found that out with the quick
perception of a cleverer woman. The inconsistent and profoundly
unreasonable way in which she instantly went on, nevertheless, to
interweave their long-abandoned boy and girl relations with their
present interview, made Clennam feel as if he were light-headed.

'One remark,' said Flora, giving their conversation, without the
slightest notice and to the great terror of Clennam, the tone of a
love-quarrel, 'I wish to make, one explanation I wish to offer, when
your Mama came and made a scene of it with my Papa and when I was called
down into the little breakfast-room where they were looking at one
another with your Mama's parasol between them seated on two chairs like
mad bulls what was I to do?'

'My dear Mrs Finching,' urged Clennam--'all so long ago and so long
concluded, is it worth while seriously to--'

'I can't Arthur,' returned Flora, 'be denounced as heartless by the
whole society of China without setting myself right when I have the
opportunity of doing so, and you must be very well aware that there
was Paul and Virginia which had to be returned and which was returned
without note or comment, not that I mean to say you could have written
to me watched as I was but if it had only come back with a red wafer on
the cover I should have known that it meant Come to Pekin Nankeen and
What's the third place, barefoot.'

'My dear Mrs Finching, you were not to blame, and I never blamed you.
We were both too young, too dependent and helpless, to do anything but
accept our separation.--Pray think how long ago,' gently remonstrated
Arthur.

'One more remark,' proceeded Flora with unslackened volubility, 'I wish
to make, one more explanation I wish to offer, for five days I had a
cold in the head from crying which I passed entirely in the back
drawing-room--there is the back drawing-room still on the first floor
and still at the back of the house to confirm my words--when that dreary
period had passed a lull succeeded years rolled on and Mr F. became
acquainted with us at a mutual friend's, he was all attention he called
next day he soon began to call three evenings a week and to send
in little things for supper it was not love on Mr F.'s part it was
adoration, Mr F. proposed with the full approval of Papa and what could
I do?'

'Nothing whatever,' said Arthur, with the cheerfulest readiness, 'but
what you did. Let an old friend assure you of his full conviction that
you did quite right.'

'One last remark,' proceeded Flora, rejecting commonplace life with a
wave of her hand, 'I wish to make, one last explanation I wish to offer,
there _was_ a time ere Mr F. first paid attentions incapable of being
mistaken, but that is past and was not to be, dear Mr Clennam you no
longer wear a golden chain you are free I trust you may be happy, here
is Papa who is always tiresome and putting in his nose everywhere where
he is not wanted.'

With these words, and with a hasty gesture fraught with timid
caution--such a gesture had Clennam's eyes been familiar with in the old
time--poor Flora left herself at eighteen years of age, a long long way
behind again; and came to a full stop at last.

Or rather, she left about half of herself at eighteen years of age
behind, and grafted the rest on to the relict of the late Mr F.; thus
making a moral mermaid of herself, which her once boy-lover contemplated
with feelings wherein his sense of the sorrowful and his sense of the
comical were curiously blended.

For example. As if there were a secret understanding between herself
and Clennam of the most thrilling nature; as if the first of a train of
post-chaises and four, extending all the way to Scotland, were at that
moment round the corner; and as if she couldn't (and wouldn't) have
walked into the Parish Church with him, under the shade of the family
umbrella, with the Patriarchal blessing on her head, and the perfect
concurrence of all mankind; Flora comforted her soul with agonies of
mysterious signalling, expressing dread of discovery. With the sensation
of becoming more and more light-headed every minute, Clennam saw the
relict of the late Mr F. enjoying herself in the most wonderful manner,
by putting herself and him in their old places, and going through all
the old performances--now, when the stage was dusty, when the scenery
was faded, when the youthful actors were dead, when the orchestra was
empty, when the lights were out. And still, through all this grotesque
revival of what he remembered as having once been prettily natural to
her, he could not but feel that it revived at sight of him, and that
there was a tender memory in it.

The Patriarch insisted on his staying to dinner, and Flora signalled
'Yes!' Clennam so wished he could have done more than stay to dinner--so
heartily wished he could have found the Flora that had been, or that
never had been--that he thought the least atonement he could make for
the disappointment he almost felt ashamed of, was to give himself up to
the family desire. Therefore, he stayed to dinner.

Pancks dined with them. Pancks steamed out of his little dock at a
quarter before six, and bore straight down for the Patriarch, who
happened to be then driving, in an inane manner, through a stagnant
account of Bleeding Heart Yard. Pancks instantly made fast to him and
hauled him out.

'Bleeding Heart Yard?' said Pancks, with a puff and a snort. 'It's a
troublesome property. Don't pay you badly, but rents are very hard to
get there. You have more trouble with that one place than with all the
places belonging to you.'

Just as the big ship in tow gets the credit, with most spectators, of
being the powerful object, so the Patriarch usually seemed to have said
himself whatever Pancks said for him.

'Indeed?' returned Clennam, upon whom this impression was so efficiently
made by a mere gleam of the polished head that he spoke the ship instead
of the Tug. 'The people are so poor there?'

'_You_ can't say, you know,' snorted Pancks, taking one of his dirty hands
out of his rusty iron-grey pockets to bite his nails, if he could find
any, and turning his beads of eyes upon his employer, 'whether they're
poor or not. They say they are, but they all say that. When a man says
he's rich, you're generally sure he isn't. Besides, if they _are_ poor,
you can't help it. You'd be poor yourself if you didn't get your rents.'
