Mr Dorrit, in a resplendent dressing-gown and cap--the dormant grub that
had so long bided its time among the Collegians had burst into a rare
butterfly--rose to receive Mrs General. A chair to Mrs General. An
easier chair, sir; what are you doing, what are you about, what do you
mean? Now, leave us!

'Mrs General,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I took the liberty--'

'By no means,' Mrs General interposed. 'I was quite at your disposition.
I had had my coffee.'

'--I took the liberty,' said Mr Dorrit again, with the magnificent
placidity of one who was above correction, 'to solicit the favour of
a little private conversation with you, because I feel rather worried
respecting my--ha--my younger daughter. You will have observed a great
difference of temperament, madam, between my two daughters?'

Said Mrs General in response, crossing her gloved hands (she was never
without gloves, and they never creased and always fitted), 'There is a
great difference.'

'May I ask to be favoured with your view of it?' said Mr Dorrit, with a
deference not incompatible with majestic serenity.

'Fanny,' returned Mrs General, 'has force of character and
self-reliance. Amy, none.'

None? O Mrs General, ask the Marshalsea stones and bars. O Mrs General,
ask the milliner who taught her to work, and the dancing-master who
taught her sister to dance. O Mrs General, Mrs General, ask me, her
father, what I owe her; and hear my testimony touching the life of this
slighted little creature from her childhood up!

No such adjuration entered Mr. Dorrit's head. He looked at Mrs
General, seated in her usual erect attitude on her coach-box behind the
proprieties, and he said in a thoughtful manner, 'True, madam.'

'I would not,' said Mrs General, 'be understood to say, observe,
that there is nothing to improve in Fanny. But there is material
there--perhaps, indeed, a little too much.'

'Will you be kind enough, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'to be--ha--more
explicit? I do not quite understand my elder daughter's having--hum--too
much material. What material?'

'Fanny,' returned Mrs General, 'at present forms too many opinions.
Perfect breeding forms none, and is never demonstrative.'

Lest he himself should be found deficient in perfect breeding, Mr Dorrit
hastened to reply, 'Unquestionably, madam, you are right.' Mrs General
returned, in her emotionless and expressionless manner, 'I believe so.'

'But you are aware, my dear madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'that my daughters
had the misfortune to lose their lamented mother when they were very
young; and that, in consequence of my not having been until lately
the recognised heir to my property, they have lived with me as
a comparatively poor, though always proud, gentleman, in--ha
hum--retirement!'

'I do not,' said Mrs General, 'lose sight of the circumstance.'

'Madam,' pursued Mr Dorrit, 'of my daughter Fanny, under her present
guidance and with such an example constantly before her--'

(Mrs General shut her eyes.)

--'I have no misgivings. There is adaptability of character in Fanny.
But my younger daughter, Mrs General, rather worries and vexes my
thoughts. I must inform you that she has always been my favourite.'

'There is no accounting,' said Mrs General, 'for these partialities.'

'Ha--no,' assented Mr Dorrit. 'No. Now, madam, I am troubled by noticing
that Amy is not, so to speak, one of ourselves. She does not care to go
about with us; she is lost in the society we have here; our tastes
are evidently not her tastes. Which,' said Mr Dorrit, summing up with
judicial gravity, 'is to say, in other words, that there is something
wrong in--ha--Amy.'

'May we incline to the supposition,' said Mrs General, with a little
touch of varnish, 'that something is referable to the novelty of the
position?'

'Excuse me, madam,' observed Mr Dorrit, rather quickly. 'The daughter
of a gentleman, though--ha--himself at one time comparatively far from
affluent--comparatively--and herself reared in--hum--retirement, need
not of necessity find this position so very novel.'

'True,' said Mrs General, 'true.'

'Therefore, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I took the liberty' (he laid an
emphasis on the phrase and repeated it, as though he stipulated, with
urbane firmness, that he must not be contradicted again), 'I took the
liberty of requesting this interview, in order that I might mention the
topic to you, and inquire how you would advise me?'

'Mr Dorrit,' returned Mrs General, 'I have conversed with Amy several
times since we have been residing here, on the general subject of the
formation of a demeanour. She has expressed herself to me as wondering
exceedingly at Venice. I have mentioned to her that it is better not to
wonder. I have pointed out to her that the celebrated Mr Eustace, the
classical tourist, did not think much of it; and that he compared the
Rialto, greatly to its disadvantage, with Westminster and Blackfriars
Bridges. I need not add, after what you have said, that I have not yet
found my arguments successful. You do me the honour to ask me what to
advise. It always appears to me (if this should prove to be a baseless
assumption, I shall be pardoned), that Mr Dorrit has been accustomed to
exercise influence over the minds of others.'

'Hum--madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I have been at the head of--ha of
a considerable community. You are right in supposing that I am not
unaccustomed to--an influential position.'

'I am happy,' returned Mrs General, 'to be so corroborated. I would
therefore the more confidently recommend that Mr Dorrit should speak to
Amy himself, and make his observations and wishes known to her. Being
his favourite, besides, and no doubt attached to him, she is all the
more likely to yield to his influence.'

'I had anticipated your suggestion, madam,' said Mr Dorrit,
'but--ha--was not sure that I might--hum--not encroach on--'

'On my province, Mr Dorrit?' said Mrs General, graciously. 'Do not
mention it.'

'Then, with your leave, madam,' resumed Mr Dorrit, ringing his little
bell to summon his valet, 'I will send for her at once.'

'Does Mr Dorrit wish me to remain?'

'Perhaps, if you have no other engagement, you would not object for a
minute or two--'

'Not at all.'

So, Tinkler the valet was instructed to find Miss Amy's maid, and to
request that subordinate to inform Miss Amy that Mr Dorrit wished to
see her in his own room. In delivering this charge to Tinkler, Mr Dorrit
looked severely at him, and also kept a jealous eye upon him until he
went out at the door, mistrusting that he might have something in his
mind prejudicial to the family dignity; that he might have even got wind
of some Collegiate joke before he came into the service, and might be
derisively reviving its remembrance at the present moment. If Tinkler
had happened to smile, however faintly and innocently, nothing would
have persuaded Mr Dorrit, to the hour of his death, but that this was
the case. As Tinkler happened, however, very fortunately for himself, to
be of a serious and composed countenance, he escaped the secret danger
that threatened him. And as on his return--when Mr Dorrit eyed him
again--he announced Miss Amy as if she had come to a funeral, he left a
vague impression on Mr Dorrit's mind that he was a well-conducted young
fellow, who had been brought up in the study of his Catechism by a
widowed mother.

'Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, 'you have just now been the subject of some
conversation between myself and Mrs General. We agree that you scarcely
seem at home here. Ha--how is this?'

A pause.

'I think, father, I require a little time.'

'Papa is a preferable mode of address,' observed Mrs General. 'Father is
rather vulgar, my dear. The word Papa, besides, gives a pretty form to
the lips. Papa, potatoes, poultry, prunes, and prism are all very
good words for the lips: especially prunes and prism. You will find it
serviceable, in the formation of a demeanour, if you sometimes say to
yourself in company--on entering a room, for instance--Papa, potatoes,
poultry, prunes and prism, prunes and prism.'

'Pray, my child,' said Mr Dorrit, 'attend to the--hum--precepts of Mrs
General.'

Poor Little Dorrit, with a rather forlorn glance at that eminent
varnisher, promised to try.

'You say, Amy,' pursued Mr Dorrit, 'that you think you require time.
Time for what?'

Another pause.

'To become accustomed to the novelty of my life, was all I meant,' said
Little Dorrit, with her loving eyes upon her father; whom she had very
nearly addressed as poultry, if not prunes and prism too, in her desire
to submit herself to Mrs General and please him.

Mr Dorrit frowned, and looked anything but pleased. 'Amy,' he returned,
'it appears to me, I must say, that you have had abundance of time for
that. Ha--you surprise me. You disappoint me. Fanny has conquered any
such little difficulties, and--hum--why not you?'

'I hope I shall do better soon,' said Little Dorrit.

'I hope so,' returned her father. 'I--ha--I most devoutly hope so, Amy.
I sent for you, in order that I might say--hum--impressively say, in
the presence of Mrs General, to whom we are all so much indebted
for obligingly being present among us, on--ha--on this or any other
occasion,' Mrs General shut her eyes, 'that I--ha hum--am not pleased
with you. You make Mrs General's a thankless task. You--ha--embarrass
me very much. You have always (as I have informed Mrs General) been my
favourite child; I have always made you a--hum--a friend and companion;
in return, I beg--I--ha--I _do_ beg, that you accommodate yourself
better to--hum--circumstances, and dutifully do what becomes your--your
station.'

Mr Dorrit was even a little more fragmentary than usual, being excited
on the subject and anxious to make himself particularly emphatic.

'I do beg,' he repeated, 'that this may be attended to, and that you
will seriously take pains and try to conduct yourself in a manner both
becoming your position as--ha--Miss Amy Dorrit, and satisfactory to
myself and Mrs General.'

That lady shut her eyes again, on being again referred to; then, slowly
opening them and rising, added these words:

'If Miss Amy Dorrit will direct her own attention to, and will accept of
my poor assistance in, the formation of a surface, Mr. Dorrit will have
no further cause of anxiety. May I take this opportunity of remarking,
as an instance in point, that it is scarcely delicate to look at
vagrants with the attention which I have seen bestowed upon them by a
very dear young friend of mine? They should not be looked at. Nothing
disagreeable should ever be looked at. Apart from such a habit standing
in the way of that graceful equanimity of surface which is so expressive
of good breeding, it hardly seems compatible with refinement of mind. A
truly refined mind will seem to be ignorant of the existence of anything
that is not perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.' Having delivered
this exalted sentiment, Mrs General made a sweeping obeisance, and
retired with an expression of mouth indicative of Prunes and Prism.

Little Dorrit, whether speaking or silent, had preserved her quiet
earnestness and her loving look. It had not been clouded, except for a
passing moment, until now. But now that she was left alone with him
the fingers of her lightly folded hands were agitated, and there was
repressed emotion in her face.

Not for herself. She might feel a little wounded, but her care was not
for herself. Her thoughts still turned, as they always had turned, to
him. A faint misgiving, which had hung about her since their accession
to fortune, that even now she could never see him as he used to be
before the prison days, had gradually begun to assume form in her mind.
She felt that, in what he had just now said to her and in his whole
bearing towards her, there was the well-known shadow of the Marshalsea
wall. It took a new shape, but it was the old sad shadow. She began
with sorrowful unwillingness to acknowledge to herself that she was
not strong enough to keep off the fear that no space in the life of man
could overcome that quarter of a century behind the prison bars. She had
no blame to bestow upon him, therefore: nothing to reproach him with,
no emotions in her faithful heart but great compassion and unbounded
tenderness.

This is why it was, that, even as he sat before her on his sofa, in the
brilliant light of a bright Italian day, the wonderful city without and
the splendours of an old palace within, she saw him at the moment in the
long-familiar gloom of his Marshalsea lodging, and wished to take her
seat beside him, and comfort him, and be again full of confidence with
him, and of usefulness to him. If he divined what was in her thoughts,
his own were not in tune with it. After some uneasy moving in his seat,
he got up and walked about, looking very much dissatisfied.

'Is there anything else you wish to say to me, dear father?'

'No, no. Nothing else.'

'I am sorry you have not been pleased with me, dear. I hope you will not
think of me with displeasure now. I am going to try, more than ever, to
adapt myself as you wish to what surrounds me--for indeed I have tried
all along, though I have failed, I know.'

'Amy,' he returned, turning short upon her. 'You--ha--habitually hurt
me.'

'Hurt you, father! I!'

'There is a--hum--a topic,' said Mr Dorrit, looking all about the
ceiling of the room, and never at the attentive, uncomplainingly shocked
face, 'a painful topic, a series of events which I wish--ha--altogether
to obliterate. This is understood by your sister, who has already
remonstrated with you in my presence; it is understood by your brother;
it is understood by--ha hum--by every one of delicacy and sensitiveness
except yourself--ha--I am sorry to say, except yourself. You,
Amy--hum--you alone and only you--constantly revive the topic, though
not in words.'

She laid her hand on his arm. She did nothing more. She gently touched
him. The trembling hand may have said, with some expression, 'Think of
me, think how I have worked, think of my many cares!' But she said not a
syllable herself.

There was a reproach in the touch so addressed to him that she had
not foreseen, or she would have withheld her hand. He began to justify
himself in a heated, stumbling, angry manner, which made nothing of it.

'I was there all those years. I was--ha--universally acknowledged as
the head of the place. I--hum--I caused you to be respected there, Amy.
I--ha hum--I gave my family a position there. I deserve a return. I
claim a return. I say, sweep it off the face of the earth and begin
afresh. Is that much? I ask, is _that_ much?'

He did not once look at her, as he rambled on in this way; but
gesticulated at, and appealed to, the empty air.

'I have suffered. Probably I know how much I have suffered better than
any one--ha--I say than any one! If _I_ can put that aside, if _I_ can
eradicate the marks of what I have endured, and can emerge before the
world--a--ha--gentleman unspoiled, unspotted--is it a great deal to
expect--I say again, is it a great deal to expect--that my children
should--hum--do the same and sweep that accursed experience off the face
of the earth?'

In spite of his flustered state, he made all these exclamations in a
carefully suppressed voice, lest the valet should overhear anything.

'Accordingly, they do it. Your sister does it. Your brother does it. You
alone, my favourite child, whom I made the friend and companion of my
life when you were a mere--hum--Baby, do not do it. You alone say you
can't do it. I provide you with valuable assistance to do it. I attach
an accomplished and highly bred lady--ha--Mrs General, to you, for the
purpose of doing it. Is it surprising that I should be displeased? Is it
necessary that I should defend myself for expressing my displeasure?
No!'

Notwithstanding which, he continued to defend himself, without any
abatement of his flushed mood.

'I am careful to appeal to that lady for confirmation, before I express
any displeasure at all. I--hum--I necessarily make that appeal within
limited bounds, or I--ha--should render legible, by that lady, what I
desire to be blotted out. Am I selfish? Do I complain for my own sake?
No. No. Principally for--ha hum--your sake, Amy.'

This last consideration plainly appeared, from his manner of pursuing
it, to have just that instant come into his head.

'I said I was hurt. So I am. So I--ha--am determined to be, whatever
is advanced to the contrary. I am hurt that my daughter, seated in
the--hum--lap of fortune, should mope and retire and proclaim herself
unequal to her destiny. I am hurt that she should--ha--systematically
reproduce what the rest of us blot out; and seem--hum--I had almost said
positively anxious--to announce to wealthy and distinguished society
that she was born and bred in--ha hum--a place that I myself decline to
name. But there is no inconsistency--ha--not the least, in my feeling
hurt, and yet complaining principally for your sake, Amy. I do; I say
again, I do. It is for your sake that I wish you, under the auspices of
Mrs General, to form a--hum--a surface. It is for your sake that I wish
you to have a--ha--truly refined mind, and (in the striking words of
Mrs General) to be ignorant of everything that is not perfectly proper,
placid, and pleasant.'

He had been running down by jerks, during his last speech, like a
sort of ill-adjusted alarum. The touch was still upon his arm. He fell
silent; and after looking about the ceiling again for a little while,
looked down at her. Her head drooped, and he could not see her face; but
her touch was tender and quiet, and in the expression of her dejected
figure there was no blame--nothing but love. He began to whimper, just
as he had done that night in the prison when she afterwards sat at
his bedside till morning; exclaimed that he was a poor ruin and a poor
wretch in the midst of his wealth; and clasped her in his arms. 'Hush,
hush, my own dear! Kiss me!' was all she said to him. His tears
were soon dried, much sooner than on the former occasion; and he was
presently afterwards very high with his valet, as a way of righting
himself for having shed any.

With one remarkable exception, to be recorded in its place, this was
the only time, in his life of freedom and fortune, when he spoke to his
daughter Amy of the old days.

But, now, the breakfast hour arrived; and with it Miss Fanny from her
apartment, and Mr Edward from his apartment. Both these young persons of
distinction were something the worse for late hours. As to Miss Fanny,
she had become the victim of an insatiate mania for what she called
'going into society;'and would have gone into it head-foremost fifty
times between sunset and sunrise, if so many opportunities had been at
her disposal. As to Mr Edward, he, too, had a large acquaintance, and
was generally engaged (for the most part, in diceing circles, or others
of a kindred nature), during the greater part of every night. For this
gentleman, when his fortunes changed, had stood at the great advantage
of being already prepared for the highest associates, and having little
to learn: so much was he indebted to the happy accidents which had made
him acquainted with horse-dealing and billiard-marking.

At breakfast, Mr Frederick Dorrit likewise appeared. As the old
gentleman inhabited the highest story of the palace, where he might have
practised pistol-shooting without much chance of discovery by the other
inmates, his younger niece had taken courage to propose the restoration
to him of his clarionet, which Mr Dorrit had ordered to be confiscated,
but which she had ventured to preserve. Notwithstanding some objections
from Miss Fanny, that it was a low instrument, and that she detested the
sound of it, the concession had been made. But it was then discovered
that he had had enough of it, and never played it, now that it was no
longer his means of getting bread. He had insensibly acquired a new
habit of shuffling into the picture-galleries, always with his twisted
paper of snuff in his hand (much to the indignation of Miss Fanny, who
had proposed the purchase of a gold box for him that the family might
not be discredited, which he had absolutely refused to carry when it was
bought); and of passing hours and hours before the portraits of renowned
Venetians. It was never made out what his dazed eyes saw in them;
whether he had an interest in them merely as pictures, or whether he
confusedly identified them with a glory that was departed, like the
strength of his own mind. But he paid his court to them with great
exactness, and clearly derived pleasure from the pursuit. After the
first few days, Little Dorrit happened one morning to assist at these
attentions. It so evidently heightened his gratification that she often
accompanied him afterwards, and the greatest delight of which the old
man had shown himself susceptible since his ruin, arose out of these
excursions, when he would carry a chair about for her from picture
to picture, and stand behind it, in spite of all her remonstrances,
silently presenting her to the noble Venetians.

It fell out that, at this family breakfast, he referred to their having
seen in a gallery, on the previous day, the lady and gentleman whom they
had encountered on the Great Saint Bernard, 'I forget the name,' said
he. 'I dare say you remember them, William? I dare say you do, Edward?'

'_I_ remember 'em well enough,' said the latter.

'I should think so,' observed Miss Fanny, with a toss of her head and
a glance at her sister. 'But they would not have been recalled to our
remembrance, I suspect, if Uncle hadn't tumbled over the subject.'

'My dear, what a curious phrase,' said Mrs General. 'Would not
inadvertently lighted upon, or accidentally referred to, be better?'

'Thank you very much, Mrs General,' returned the young lady, 'no, I
think not. On the whole I prefer my own expression.'

This was always Miss Fanny's way of receiving a suggestion from Mrs
General. But she always stored it up in her mind, and adopted it at
another time.

'I should have mentioned our having met Mr and Mrs Gowan, Fanny,' said
Little Dorrit, 'even if Uncle had not. I have scarcely seen you since,
you know. I meant to have spoken of it at breakfast; because I should
like to pay a visit to Mrs Gowan, and to become better acquainted with
her, if Papa and Mrs General do not object.'

'Well, Amy,' said Fanny, 'I am sure I am glad to find you at last
expressing a wish to become better acquainted with anybody in Venice.
Though whether Mr and Mrs Gowan are desirable acquaintances, remains to
be determined.'

'Mrs Gowan I spoke of, dear.'

'No doubt,' said Fanny. 'But you can't separate her from her husband, I
believe, without an Act of Parliament.'

'Do you think, Papa,' inquired Little Dorrit, with diffidence and
hesitation, 'there is any objection to my making this visit?'

'Really,' he replied, 'I--ha--what is Mrs General's view?'

Mrs General's view was, that not having the honour of any acquaintance
with the lady and gentleman referred to, she was not in a position
to varnish the present article. She could only remark, as a general
principle observed in the varnishing trade, that much depended on the
quarter from which the lady under consideration was accredited to a
family so conspicuously niched in the social temple as the family of
Dorrit.

At this remark the face of Mr Dorrit gloomed considerably. He was about
(connecting the accrediting with an obtrusive person of the name
of Clennam, whom he imperfectly remembered in some former state of
existence) to black-ball the name of Gowan finally, when Edward Dorrit,
Esquire, came into the conversation, with his glass in his eye, and the
preliminary remark of 'I say--you there! Go out, will you!'--which was
addressed to a couple of men who were handing the dishes round, as a
courteous intimation that their services could be temporarily dispensed
with.

Those menials having obeyed the mandate, Edward Dorrit, Esquire,
proceeded.

'Perhaps it's a matter of policy to let you all know that these
Gowans--in whose favour, or at least the gentleman's, I can't be
supposed to be much prepossessed myself--are known to people of
importance, if that makes any difference.'

'That, I would say,' observed the fair varnisher, 'Makes the greatest
difference. The connection in question, being really people of
importance and consideration--'

'As to that,' said Edward Dorrit, Esquire, 'I'll give you the means of
judging for yourself. You are acquainted, perhaps, with the famous name
of Merdle?'

'The great Merdle!' exclaimed Mrs General.

'_The_ Merdle,' said Edward Dorrit, Esquire. 'They are known to him.
Mrs Gowan--I mean the dowager, my polite friend's mother--is intimate
with Mrs Merdle, and I know these two to be on their visiting list.'

'If so, a more undeniable guarantee could not be given,' said Mrs
General to Mr Dorrit, raising her gloves and bowing her head, as if she
were doing homage to some visible graven image.

'I beg to ask my son, from motives of--ah--curiosity,' Mr Dorrit
observed, with a decided change in his manner, 'how he becomes possessed
of this--hum--timely information?'

'It's not a long story, sir,' returned Edward Dorrit, Esquire, 'and you
shall have it out of hand. To begin with, Mrs Merdle is the lady you had
the parley with at what's-his-name place.'

'Martigny,' interposed Miss Fanny with an air of infinite languor.

'Martigny,' assented her brother, with a slight nod and a slight wink;
in acknowledgment of which, Miss Fanny looked surprised, and laughed and
reddened.

'How can that be, Edward?' said Mr Dorrit. 'You informed me that the
name of the gentleman with whom you conferred was--ha--Sparkler. Indeed,
you showed me his card. Hum. Sparkler.'

'No doubt of it, father; but it doesn't follow that his mother's name
must be the same. Mrs Merdle was married before, and he is her son. She
is in Rome now; where probably we shall know more of her, as you decide
to winter there. Sparkler is just come here. I passed last evening in
company with Sparkler. Sparkler is a very good fellow on the
whole, though rather a bore on one subject, in consequence of being
tremendously smitten with a certain young lady.' Here Edward Dorrit,
Esquire, eyed Miss Fanny through his glass across the table. 'We
happened last night to compare notes about our travels, and I had the
information I have given you from Sparkler himself.' Here he ceased;
continuing to eye Miss Fanny through his glass, with a face much
twisted, and not ornamentally so, in part by the action of keeping his
glass in his eye, and in part by the great subtlety of his smile.

'Under these circumstances,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I believe I express the
sentiments of--ha--Mrs General, no less than my own, when I say
that there is no objection, but--ha hum--quite the contrary--to your
gratifying your desire, Amy. I trust I may--ha--hail--this desire,' said
Mr Dorrit, in an encouraging and forgiving manner, 'as an auspicious
omen. It is quite right to know these people. It is a very proper
thing. Mr Merdle's is a name of--ha--world-wide repute. Mr Merdle's
undertakings are immense. They bring him in such vast sums of money that
they are regarded as--hum--national benefits. Mr Merdle is the man of
this time. The name of Merdle is the name of the age. Pray do everything
on my behalf that is civil to Mr and Mrs Gowan, for we will--ha--we will
certainly notice them.'

This magnificent accordance of Mr Dorrit's recognition settled the
matter. It was not observed that Uncle had pushed away his plate, and
forgotten his breakfast; but he was not much observed at any time,
except by Little Dorrit. The servants were recalled, and the meal
proceeded to its conclusion. Mrs General rose and left the table.
Little Dorrit rose and left the table. When Edward and Fanny remained
whispering together across it, and when Mr Dorrit remained eating figs
and reading a French newspaper, Uncle suddenly fixed the attention of
all three by rising out of his chair, striking his hand upon the table,
and saying, 'Brother! I protest against it!'

If he had made a proclamation in an unknown tongue, and given up the
ghost immediately afterwards, he could not have astounded his audience
more. The paper fell from Mr Dorrit's hand, and he sat petrified, with a
fig half way to his mouth.

'Brother!' said the old man, conveying a surprising energy into his
trembling voice, 'I protest against it! I love you; you know I love you
dearly. In these many years I have never been untrue to you in a single
thought. Weak as I am, I would at any time have struck any man who spoke
ill of you. But, brother, brother, brother, I protest against it!'

It was extraordinary to see of what a burst of earnestness such a
decrepit man was capable. His eyes became bright, his grey hair rose on
his head, markings of purpose on his brow and face which had faded from
them for five-and-twenty years, started out again, and there was an
energy in his hand that made its action nervous once more.

'My dear Frederick!' exclaimed Mr Dorrit faintly. 'What is wrong? What
is the matter?'

'How dare you,' said the old man, turning round on Fanny, 'how dare you
do it? Have you no memory? Have you no heart?'

'Uncle?' cried Fanny, affrighted and bursting into tears, 'why do you
attack me in this cruel manner? What have I done?'

'Done?' returned the old man, pointing to her sister's place, 'where's
your affectionate invaluable friend? Where's your devoted guardian?
Where's your more than mother? How dare you set up superiorities against
all these characters combined in your sister? For shame, you false girl,
for shame!'

'I love Amy,' cried Miss Fanny, sobbing and weeping, 'as well as I love
my life--better than I love my life. I don't deserve to be so treated. I
am as grateful to Amy, and as fond of Amy, as it's possible for any
human being to be. I wish I was dead. I never was so wickedly wronged.
And only because I am anxious for the family credit.'

'To the winds with the family credit!' cried the old man, with great
scorn and indignation. 'Brother, I protest against pride. I protest
against ingratitude. I protest against any one of us here who have known
what we have known, and have seen what we have seen, setting up any
pretension that puts Amy at a moment's disadvantage, or to the cost of
a moment's pain. We may know that it's a base pretension by its having
that effect. It ought to bring a judgment on us. Brother, I protest
against it in the sight of God!'

As his hand went up above his head and came down on the table, it might
have been a blacksmith's. After a few moments' silence, it had relaxed
into its usual weak condition. He went round to his brother with his
ordinary shuffling step, put the hand on his shoulder, and said, in a
softened voice, 'William, my dear, I felt obliged to say it; forgive me,
for I felt obliged to say it!' and then went, in his bowed way, out of
the palace hall, just as he might have gone out of the Marshalsea room.

All this time Fanny had been sobbing and crying, and still continued to
do so. Edward, beyond opening his mouth in amazement, had not opened his
lips, and had done nothing but stare. Mr Dorrit also had been utterly
discomfited, and quite unable to assert himself in any way. Fanny was
now the first to speak.

'I never, never, never was so used!' she sobbed. 'There never was
anything so harsh and unjustifiable, so disgracefully violent and cruel!
Dear, kind, quiet little Amy, too, what would she feel if she could know
that she had been innocently the means of exposing me to such treatment!
But I'll never tell her! No, good darling, I'll never tell her!'

This helped Mr Dorrit to break his silence.

'My dear,' said he, 'I--ha--approve of your resolution. It will be--ha
hum--much better not to speak of this to Amy. It might--hum--it
might distress her. Ha. No doubt it would distress her greatly. It
is considerate and right to avoid doing so. We will--ha--keep this to
ourselves.'

'But the cruelty of Uncle!' cried Miss Fanny. 'O, I never can forgive
the wanton cruelty of Uncle!'

'My dear,' said Mr Dorrit, recovering his tone, though he remained
unusually pale, 'I must request you not to say so. You must remember
that your uncle is--ha--not what he formerly was. You must remember
that your uncle's state requires--hum--great forbearance from us, great
forbearance.'

'I am sure,' cried Fanny, piteously, 'it is only charitable to suppose
that there must be something wrong in him somewhere, or he never could
have so attacked Me, of all the people in the world.'

'Fanny,' returned Mr Dorrit in a deeply fraternal tone, 'you know, with
his innumerable good points, what a--hum--wreck your uncle is; and, I
entreat you by the fondness that I have for him, and by the fidelity
that you know I have always shown him, to--ha--to draw your own
conclusions, and to spare my brotherly feelings.'

This ended the scene; Edward Dorrit, Esquire, saying nothing throughout,
but looking, to the last, perplexed and doubtful. Miss Fanny awakened
much affectionate uneasiness in her sister's mind that day by passing
the greater part of it in violent fits of embracing her, and in
alternately giving her brooches, and wishing herself dead.




CHAPTER 6. Something Right Somewhere


To be in the halting state of Mr Henry Gowan; to have left one of two
powers in disgust; to want the necessary qualifications for finding
promotion with another, and to be loitering moodily about on neutral
ground, cursing both; is to be in a situation unwholesome for the mind,
which time is not likely to improve. The worst class of sum worked in
the every-day world is cyphered by the diseased arithmeticians who are
always in the rule of Subtraction as to the merits and successes of
others, and never in Addition as to their own.

The habit, too, of seeking some sort of recompense in the discontented
boast of being disappointed, is a habit fraught with degeneracy. A
certain idle carelessness and recklessness of consistency soon comes of
it. To bring deserving things down by setting undeserving things up is
one of its perverted delights; and there is no playing fast and loose
with the truth, in any game, without growing the worse for it.

In his expressed opinions of all performances in the Art of painting
that were completely destitute of merit, Gowan was the most liberal
fellow on earth. He would declare such a man to have more power in his
little finger (provided he had none), than such another had (provided he
had much) in his whole mind and body. If the objection were taken that
the thing commended was trash, he would reply, on behalf of his art, 'My
good fellow, what do we all turn out but trash? _I_ turn out nothing else,
and I make you a present of the confession.'

To make a vaunt of being poor was another of the incidents of his
splenetic state, though this may have had the design in it of showing
that he ought to be rich; just as he would publicly laud and decry the
Barnacles, lest it should be forgotten that he belonged to the family.
Howbeit, these two subjects were very often on his lips; and he managed
them so well that he might have praised himself by the month together,
and not have made himself out half so important a man as he did by his
light disparagement of his claims on anybody's consideration.

Out of this same airy talk of his, it always soon came to be understood,
wherever he and his wife went, that he had married against the wishes
of his exalted relations, and had had much ado to prevail on them to
countenance her. He never made the representation, on the contrary
seemed to laugh the idea to scorn; but it did happen that, with all his
pains to depreciate himself, he was always in the superior position.
From the days of their honeymoon, Minnie Gowan felt sensible of being
usually regarded as the wife of a man who had made a descent in marrying
her, but whose chivalrous love for her had cancelled that inequality.

To Venice they had been accompanied by Monsieur Blandois of Paris, and
at Venice Monsieur Blandois of Paris was very much in the society of
Gowan. When they had first met this gallant gentleman at Geneva,
Gowan had been undecided whether to kick him or encourage him; and had
remained for about four-and-twenty hours, so troubled to settle
the point to his satisfaction, that he had thought of tossing up a
five-franc piece on the terms, 'Tails, kick; heads, encourage,' and
abiding by the voice of the oracle. It chanced, however, that his wife
expressed a dislike to the engaging Blandois, and that the balance
of feeling in the hotel was against him. Upon it, Gowan resolved to
encourage him.

Why this perversity, if it were not in a generous fit?--which it was
not. Why should Gowan, very much the superior of Blandois of Paris, and
very well able to pull that prepossessing gentleman to pieces and find
out the stuff he was made of, take up with such a man? In the first
place, he opposed the first separate wish he observed in his wife,
because her father had paid his debts and it was desirable to take an
early opportunity of asserting his independence. In the second place,
he opposed the prevalent feeling, because with many capacities of
being otherwise, he was an ill-conditioned man. He found a pleasure in
declaring that a courtier with the refined manners of Blandois ought
to rise to the greatest distinction in any polished country. He found a
pleasure in setting up Blandois as the type of elegance, and making
him a satire upon others who piqued themselves on personal graces.
He seriously protested that the bow of Blandois was perfect, that the
address of Blandois was irresistible, and that the picturesque ease
of Blandois would be cheaply purchased (if it were not a gift, and
unpurchasable) for a hundred thousand francs. That exaggeration in the
manner of the man which has been noticed as appertaining to him and to
every such man, whatever his original breeding, as certainly as the sun
belongs to this system, was acceptable to Gowan as a caricature, which
he found it a humorous resource to have at hand for the ridiculing of
numbers of people who necessarily did more or less of what Blandois
overdid. Thus he had taken up with him; and thus, negligently
strengthening these inclinations with habit, and idly deriving some
amusement from his talk, he had glided into a way of having him for
a companion. This, though he supposed him to live by his wits at
play-tables and the like; though he suspected him to be a coward, while
he himself was daring and courageous; though he thoroughly knew him to
be disliked by Minnie; and though he cared so little for him, after all,
that if he had given her any tangible personal cause to regard him with
aversion, he would have had no compunction whatever in flinging him out
of the highest window in Venice into the deepest water of the city.

Little Dorrit would have been glad to make her visit to Mrs Gowan,
alone; but as Fanny, who had not yet recovered from her Uncle's protest,
though it was four-and-twenty hours of age, pressingly offered her
company, the two sisters stepped together into one of the gondolas under
Mr Dorrit's window, and, with the courier in attendance, were taken in
high state to Mrs Gowan's lodging. In truth, their state was rather too
high for the lodging, which was, as Fanny complained, 'fearfully out of
the way,' and which took them through a complexity of narrow streets of
water, which the same lady disparaged as 'mere ditches.'

The house, on a little desert island, looked as if it had broken
away from somewhere else, and had floated by chance into its present
anchorage in company with a vine almost as much in want of training as
the poor wretches who were lying under its leaves. The features of the
surrounding picture were, a church with hoarding and scaffolding about
it, which had been under suppositious repair so long that the means of
repair looked a hundred years old, and had themselves fallen into decay;
a quantity of washed linen, spread to dry in the sun; a number of houses
at odds with one another and grotesquely out of the perpendicular, like
rotten pre-Adamite cheeses cut into fantastic shapes and full of mites;
and a feverish bewilderment of windows, with their lattice-blinds all
hanging askew, and something draggled and dirty dangling out of most of
them.

On the first-floor of the house was a Bank--a surprising experience for
any gentleman of commercial pursuits bringing laws for all mankind from
a British city--where two spare clerks, like dried dragoons, in green
velvet caps adorned with golden tassels, stood, bearded, behind a small
counter in a small room, containing no other visible objects than an
empty iron-safe with the door open, a jug of water, and a papering of
garland of roses; but who, on lawful requisition, by merely dipping
their hands out of sight, could produce exhaustless mounds of five-franc
pieces. Below the Bank was a suite of three or four rooms with barred
windows, which had the appearance of a jail for criminal rats. Above the
Bank was Mrs Gowan's residence.

Notwithstanding that its walls were blotched, as if missionary maps were
bursting out of them to impart geographical knowledge; notwithstanding
that its weird furniture was forlornly faded and musty, and that the
prevailing Venetian odour of bilge water and an ebb tide on a weedy
shore was very strong; the place was better within, than it promised.
The door was opened by a smiling man like a reformed assassin--a
temporary servant--who ushered them into the room where Mrs Gowan sat,
with the announcement that two beautiful English ladies were come to see
the mistress.

Mrs Gowan, who was engaged in needlework, put her work aside in a
covered basket, and rose, a little hurriedly. Miss Fanny was excessively
courteous to her, and said the usual nothings with the skill of a
veteran.

'Papa was extremely sorry,' proceeded Fanny, 'to be engaged to-day (he
is so much engaged here, our acquaintance being so wretchedly large!);
and particularly requested me to bring his card for Mr Gowan. That I may
be sure to acquit myself of a commission which he impressed upon me at
least a dozen times, allow me to relieve my conscience by placing it on
the table at once.'

Which she did with veteran ease.

'We have been,' said Fanny, 'charmed to understand that you know the
Merdles. We hope it may be another means of bringing us together.'

'They are friends,' said Mrs Gowan, 'of Mr Gowan's family. I have not
yet had the pleasure of a personal introduction to Mrs Merdle, but I
suppose I shall be presented to her at Rome.'

'Indeed?' returned Fanny, with an appearance of amiably quenching her
own superiority. 'I think you'll like her.'

'You know her very well?'

'Why, you see,' said Fanny, with a frank action of her pretty shoulders,
'in London one knows every one. We met her on our way here, and, to say
the truth, papa was at first rather cross with her for taking one of the
rooms that our people had ordered for us. However, of course, that soon
blew over, and we were all good friends again.'

Although the visit had as yet given Little Dorrit no opportunity of
conversing with Mrs Gowan, there was a silent understanding between
them, which did as well. She looked at Mrs Gowan with keen and unabated
interest; the sound of her voice was thrilling to her; nothing that was
near her, or about her, or at all concerned her, escaped Little Dorrit.
She was quicker to perceive the slightest matter here, than in any other
case--but one.

'You have been quite well,' she now said, 'since that night?'

'Quite, my dear. And you?'

'Oh! I am always well,' said Little Dorrit, timidly. 'I--yes, thank you.'

There was no reason for her faltering and breaking off, other than that
Mrs Gowan had touched her hand in speaking to her, and their looks had
met. Something thoughtfully apprehensive in the large, soft eyes, had
checked Little Dorrit in an instant.

'You don't know that you are a favourite of my husband's, and that I am
almost bound to be jealous of you?' said Mrs Gowan.

Little Dorrit, blushing, shook her head.

'He will tell you, if he tells you what he tells me, that you are
quieter and quicker of resource than any one he ever saw.'

'He speaks far too well of me,' said Little Dorrit.

'I doubt that; but I don't at all doubt that I must tell him you
are here. I should never be forgiven, if I were to let you--and Miss
Dorrit--go, without doing so. May I? You can excuse the disorder and
discomfort of a painter's studio?'

The inquiries were addressed to Miss Fanny, who graciously replied that
she would be beyond anything interested and enchanted. Mrs Gowan went to
a door, looked in beyond it, and came back. 'Do Henry the favour to come
in,' said she, 'I knew he would be pleased!'

The first object that confronted Little Dorrit, entering first, was
Blandois of Paris in a great cloak and a furtive slouched hat, standing
on a throne platform in a corner, as he had stood on the Great Saint
Bernard, when the warning arms seemed to be all pointing up at him. She
recoiled from this figure, as it smiled at her.

'Don't be alarmed,' said Gowan, coming from his easel behind the door.
'It's only Blandois. He is doing duty as a model to-day. I am making
a study of him. It saves me money to turn him to some use. We poor
painters have none to spare.'

Blandois of Paris pulled off his slouched hat, and saluted the ladies
without coming out of his corner.

'A thousand pardons!' said he. 'But the Professore here is so inexorable
with me, that I am afraid to stir.'

'Don't stir, then,' said Gowan coolly, as the sisters approached the
easel. 'Let the ladies at least see the original of the daub, that they
may know what it's meant for. There he stands, you see. A bravo waiting
for his prey, a distinguished noble waiting to save his country, the
common enemy waiting to do somebody a bad turn, an angelic messenger
waiting to do somebody a good turn--whatever you think he looks most
like!'

'Say, Professore Mio, a poor gentleman waiting to do homage to
elegance and beauty,' remarked Blandois.

'Or say, Cattivo Soggetto Mio,' returned Gowan, touching the painted
face with his brush in the part where the real face had moved, 'a
murderer after the fact. Show that white hand of yours, Blandois. Put it
outside the cloak. Keep it still.'

Blandois' hand was unsteady; but he laughed, and that would naturally
shake it.

'He was formerly in some scuffle with another murderer, or with a
victim, you observe,' said Gowan, putting in the markings of the hand
with a quick, impatient, unskilful touch, 'and these are the tokens of
it. Outside the cloak, man!--Corpo di San Marco, what are you thinking
of?'

Blandois of Paris shook with a laugh again, so that his hand shook more;
now he raised it to twist his moustache, which had a damp appearance;
and now he stood in the required position, with a little new swagger.

His face was so directed in reference to the spot where Little Dorrit
stood by the easel, that throughout he looked at her. Once attracted by
his peculiar eyes, she could not remove her own, and they had looked
at each other all the time. She trembled now; Gowan, feeling it, and
supposing her to be alarmed by the large dog beside him, whose head she
caressed in her hand, and who had just uttered a low growl, glanced at
her to say, 'He won't hurt you, Miss Dorrit.'

'I am not afraid of him,' she returned in the same breath; 'but will you
look at him?'

In a moment Gowan had thrown down his brush, and seized the dog with
both hands by the collar.

'Blandois! How can you be such a fool as to provoke him! By Heaven, and
the other place too, he'll tear you to bits! Lie down! Lion! Do you hear
my voice, you rebel!'

The great dog, regardless of being half-choked by his collar, was
obdurately pulling with his dead weight against his master, resolved to
get across the room. He had been crouching for a spring at the moment
when his master caught him.

'Lion! Lion!' He was up on his hind legs, and it was a wrestle between
master and dog. 'Get back! Down, Lion! Get out of his sight, Blandois!
What devil have you conjured into the dog?'

'I have done nothing to him.'

'Get out of his sight or I can't hold the wild beast! Get out of the
room! By my soul, he'll kill you!'

The dog, with a ferocious bark, made one other struggle as Blandois
vanished; then, in the moment of the dog's submission, the master,
little less angry than the dog, felled him with a blow on the head, and
standing over him, struck him many times severely with the heel of his
boot, so that his mouth was presently bloody.

'Now get you into that corner and lie down,' said Gowan, 'or I'll take
you out and shoot you.'

Lion did as he was ordered, and lay down licking his mouth and chest.
Lion's master stopped for a moment to take breath, and then, recovering
his usual coolness of manner, turned to speak to his frightened wife
and her visitors. Probably the whole occurrence had not occupied two
minutes.

'Come, come, Minnie! You know he is always good-humoured and tractable.
Blandois must have irritated him,--made faces at him. The dog has his
likings and dislikings, and Blandois is no great favourite of his; but
I am sure you will give him a character, Minnie, for never having been
like this before.'

Minnie was too much disturbed to say anything connected in reply; Little
Dorrit was already occupied in soothing her; Fanny, who had cried out
twice or thrice, held Gowan's arm for protection; Lion, deeply ashamed
of having caused them this alarm, came trailing himself along the ground
to the feet of his mistress.

'You furious brute,' said Gowan, striking him with his foot again. 'You
shall do penance for this.' And he struck him again, and yet again.

'O, pray don't punish him any more,' cried Little Dorrit. 'Don't hurt
him. See how gentle he is!' At her entreaty, Gowan spared him; and he
deserved her intercession, for truly he was as submissive, and as sorry,
and as wretched as a dog could be.

It was not easy to recover this shock and make the visit unrestrained,
even though Fanny had not been, under the best of circumstances, the
least trifle in the way. In such further communication as passed among
them before the sisters took their departure, Little Dorrit fancied it
was revealed to her that Mr Gowan treated his wife, even in his very
fondness, too much like a beautiful child. He seemed so unsuspicious of
the depths of feeling which she knew must lie below that surface, that
she doubted if there could be any such depths in himself. She wondered
whether his want of earnestness might be the natural result of his want
of such qualities, and whether it was with people as with ships, that,
in too shallow and rocky waters, their anchors had no hold, and they
drifted anywhere.

He attended them down the staircase, jocosely apologising for the
poor quarters to which such poor fellows as himself were limited, and
remarking that when the high and mighty Barnacles, his relatives, who
would be dreadfully ashamed of them, presented him with better, he would
live in better to oblige them. At the water's edge they were saluted by
Blandois, who looked white enough after his late adventure, but who made
very light of it notwithstanding,--laughing at the mention of Lion.

Leaving the two together under the scrap of vine upon the causeway,
Gowan idly scattering the leaves from it into the water, and Blandois
lighting a cigarette, the sisters were paddled away in state as they had
come. They had not glided on for many minutes, when Little Dorrit became
