Once more the stir and struggle in her, and she ran to a closet, tore
the door open, took down a hood or shawl, and wrapped it over her head.
Affery, who had watched her in terror, darted to her in the middle of
the room, caught hold of her dress, and went on her knees to her.

'Don't, don't, don't! What are you doing? Where are you going? You're a
fearful woman, but I don't bear you no ill-will. I can do poor Arthur
no good now, that I see; and you needn't be afraid of me. I'll keep your
secret. Don't go out, you'll fall dead in the street. Only promise me,
that, if it's the poor thing that's kept here secretly, you'll let me
take charge of her and be her nurse. Only promise me that, and never be
afraid of me.'

Mrs Clennam stood still for an instant, at the height of her rapid
haste, saying in stern amazement:

'Kept here? She has been dead a score of years or more. Ask
Flintwinch--ask _him_. They can both tell you that she died when Arthur
went abroad.'

'So much the worse,' said Affery, with a shiver, 'for she haunts the
house, then. Who else rustles about it, making signals by dropping
dust so softly? Who else comes and goes, and marks the walls with
long crooked touches when we are all a-bed? Who else holds the door
sometimes? But don't go out--don't go out! Mistress, you'll die in the
street!'

Her mistress only disengaged her dress from the beseeching hands, said
to Rigaud, 'Wait here till I come back!' and ran out of the room. They
saw her, from the window, run wildly through the court-yard and out at
the gateway.

For a few moments they stood motionless. Affery was the first to move,
and she, wringing her hands, pursued her mistress. Next, Jeremiah
Flintwinch, slowly backing to the door, with one hand in a pocket, and
the other rubbing his chin, twisted himself out in his reticent way,
speechlessly. Rigaud, left alone, composed himself upon the window-seat
of the open window, in the old Marseilles-jail attitude. He laid his
cigarettes and fire-box ready to his hand, and fell to smoking.

'Whoof! Almost as dull as the infernal old jail. Warmer, but almost as
dismal. Wait till she comes back? Yes, certainly; but where is she gone,
and how long will she be gone? No matter! Rigaud Lagnier Blandois, my
amiable subject, you will get your money. You will enrich yourself. You
have lived a gentleman; you will die a gentleman. You triumph, my little
boy; but it is your character to triumph. Whoof!'

In the hour of his triumph, his moustache went up and his nose came
down, as he ogled a great beam over his head with particular
satisfaction.




CHAPTER 31. Closed


The sun had set, and the streets were dim in the dusty twilight, when
the figure so long unused to them hurried on its way. In the immediate
neighbourhood of the old house it attracted little attention, for there
were only a few straggling people to notice it; but, ascending from the
river by the crooked ways that led to London Bridge, and passing into
the great main road, it became surrounded by astonishment.

Resolute and wild of look, rapid of foot and yet weak and uncertain,
conspicuously dressed in its black garments and with its hurried
head-covering, gaunt and of an unearthly paleness, it pressed forward,
taking no more heed of the throng than a sleep-walker. More remarkable
by being so removed from the crowd it was among than if it had been
lifted on a pedestal to be seen, the figure attracted all eyes.
Saunterers pricked up their attention to observe it; busy people,
crossing it, slackened their pace and turned their heads; companions
pausing and standing aside, whispered one another to look at this
spectral woman who was coming by; and the sweep of the figure as it
passed seemed to create a vortex, drawing the most idle and most curious
after it.

Made giddy by the turbulent irruption of this multitude of staring faces
into her cell of years, by the confusing sensation of being in the air,
and the yet more confusing sensation of being afoot, by the unexpected
changes in half-remembered objects, and the want of likeness between the
controllable pictures her imagination had often drawn of the life from
which she was secluded and the overwhelming rush of the reality, she
held her way as if she were environed by distracting thoughts, rather
than by external humanity and observation. But, having crossed the
bridge and gone some distance straight onward, she remembered that she
must ask for a direction; and it was only then, when she stopped and
turned to look about her for a promising place of inquiry, that she
found herself surrounded by an eager glare of faces.

'Why are you encircling me?' she asked, trembling.

None of those who were nearest answered; but from the outer ring there
arose a shrill cry of ''Cause you're mad!'

'I am sure as sane as any one here. I want to find the Marshalsea
prison.'

The shrill outer circle again retorted, 'Then that 'ud show you was mad
if nothing else did, 'cause it's right opposite!'

A short, mild, quiet-looking young man made his way through to her, as
a whooping ensued on this reply, and said: 'Was it the Marshalsea you
wanted? I'm going on duty there. Come across with me.'

She laid her hand upon his arm, and he took her over the way; the crowd,
rather injured by the near prospect of losing her, pressing before and
behind and on either side, and recommending an adjournment to Bedlam.
After a momentary whirl in the outer court-yard, the prison-door opened,
and shut upon them. In the Lodge, which seemed by contrast with the
outer noise a place of refuge and peace, a yellow lamp was already
striving with the prison shadows.

'Why, John!' said the turnkey who admitted them. 'What is it?'

'Nothing, father; only this lady not knowing her way, and being badgered
by the boys. Who did you want, ma'am?'

'Miss Dorrit. Is she here?'

The young man became more interested. 'Yes, she is here. What might your
name be?'

'Mrs Clennam.'

'Mr Clennam's mother?' asked the young man.

She pressed her lips together, and hesitated. 'Yes. She had better be
told it is his mother.'

'You see,' said the young man,'the Marshal's family living in the
country at present, the Marshal has given Miss Dorrit one of the rooms
in his house to use when she likes. Don't you think you had better come
up there, and let me bring Miss Dorrit?'

She signified her assent, and he unlocked a door and conducted her up
a side staircase into a dwelling-house above. He showed her into a
darkening room, and left her. The room looked down into the darkening
prison-yard, with its inmates strolling here and there, leaning out
of windows communing as much apart as they could with friends who were
going away, and generally wearing out their imprisonment as they best
might that summer evening. The air was heavy and hot; the closeness
of the place, oppressive; and from without there arose a rush of
free sounds, like the jarring memory of such things in a headache and
heartache. She stood at the window, bewildered, looking down into this
prison as it were out of her own different prison, when a soft word or
two of surprise made her start, and Little Dorrit stood before her.

'Is it possible, Mrs Clennam, that you are so happily recovered as--'

Little Dorrit stopped, for there was neither happiness nor health in the
face that turned to her.

'This is not recovery; it is not strength; I don't know what it is.'
With an agitated wave of her hand, she put all that aside. 'You have a
packet left with you which you were to give to Arthur, if it was not
reclaimed before this place closed to-night.'

'Yes.'

'I reclaim it.'

Little Dorrit took it from her bosom, and gave it into her hand, which
remained stretched out after receiving it.

'Have you any idea of its contents?'

Frightened by her being there with that new power Of Movement in her,
which, as she said herself, was not strength, and which was unreal
to look upon, as though a picture or statue had been animated, Little
Dorrit answered 'No.'

'Read them.'

Little Dorrit took the packet from the still outstretched hand, and
broke the seal. Mrs Clennam then gave her the inner packet that was
addressed to herself, and held the other. The shadow of the wall and of
the prison buildings, which made the room sombre at noon, made it too
dark to read there, with the dusk deepening apace, save in the window.
In the window, where a little of the bright summer evening sky
could shine upon her, Little Dorrit stood, and read. After a broken
exclamation or so of wonder and of terror, she read in silence. When
she had finished, she looked round, and her old mistress bowed herself
before her.

'You know, now, what I have done.'

'I think so. I am afraid so; though my mind is so hurried, and so sorry,
and has so much to pity that it has not been able to follow all I have
read,' said Little Dorrit tremulously.

'I will restore to you what I have withheld from you. Forgive me. Can
you forgive me?'

'I can, and Heaven knows I do! Do not kiss my dress and kneel to me; you
are too old to kneel to me; I forgive you freely without that.'

'I have more yet to ask.'

'Not in that posture,' said Little Dorrit. 'It is unnatural to see your
grey hair lower than mine. Pray rise; let me help you.' With that she
raised her up, and stood rather shrinking from her, but looking at her
earnestly.

'The great petition that I make to you (there is another which grows
out of it), the great supplication that I address to your merciful and
gentle heart, is, that you will not disclose this to Arthur until I am
dead. If you think, when you have had time for consideration, that it
can do him any good to know it while I am yet alive, then tell him. But
you will not think that; and in such case, will you promise me to spare
me until I am dead?'

'I am so sorry, and what I have read has so confused my thoughts,'
returned Little Dorrit, 'that I can scarcely give you a steady answer.
If I should be quite sure that to be acquainted with it will do Mr
Clennam no good--'

'I know you are attached to him, and will make him the first
consideration. It is right that he should be the first consideration. I
ask that. But, having regarded him, and still finding that you may spare
me for the little time I shall remain on earth, will you do it?'

'I will.'

'GOD bless you!'

She stood in the shadow so that she was only a veiled form to Little
Dorrit in the light; but the sound of her voice, in saying those three
grateful words, was at once fervent and broken--broken by emotion as
unfamiliar to her frozen eyes as action to her frozen limbs.

'You will wonder, perhaps,' she said in a stronger tone, 'that I can
better bear to be known to you whom I have wronged, than to the son
of my enemy who wronged me.--For she did wrong me! She not only sinned
grievously against the Lord, but she wronged me. What Arthur's father
was to me, she made him. From our marriage day I was his dread, and that
she made me. I was the scourge of both, and that is referable to her.
You love Arthur (I can see the blush upon your face; may it be the dawn
of happier days to both of you!), and you will have thought already that
he is as merciful and kind as you, and why do I not trust myself to him
as soon as to you. Have you not thought so?'

'No thought,' said Little Dorrit, 'can be quite a stranger to my heart,
that springs out of the knowledge that Mr Clennam is always to be relied
upon for being kind and generous and good.'

'I do not doubt it. Yet Arthur is, of the whole world, the one person
from whom I would conceal this, while I am in it. I kept over him as
a child, in the days of his first remembrance, my restraining and
correcting hand. I was stern with him, knowing that the transgressions
of the parents are visited on their offspring, and that there was an
angry mark upon him at his birth. I have sat with him and his father,
seeing the weakness of his father yearning to unbend to him; and forcing
it back, that the child might work out his release in bondage and
hardship. I have seen him, with his mother's face, looking up at me in
awe from his little books, and trying to soften me with his mother's
ways that hardened me.'

The shrinking of her auditress stopped her for a moment in her flow of
words, delivered in a retrospective gloomy voice.

'For his good. Not for the satisfaction of my injury. What was I, and
what was the worth of that, before the curse of Heaven! I have seen that
child grow up; not to be pious in a chosen way (his mother's influence
lay too heavy on him for that), but still to be just and upright, and
to be submissive to me. He never loved me, as I once half-hoped he
might--so frail we are, and so do the corrupt affections of the flesh
war with our trusts and tasks; but he always respected me and ordered
himself dutifully to me. He does to this hour. With an empty place in
his heart that he has never known the meaning of, he has turned
away from me and gone his separate road; but even that he has done
considerately and with deference. These have been his relations towards
me. Yours have been of a much slighter kind, spread over a much shorter
time. When you have sat at your needle in my room, you have been in fear
of me, but you have supposed me to have been doing you a kindness; you
are better informed now, and know me to have done you an injury. Your
misconstruction and misunderstanding of the cause in which, and the
motives with which, I have worked out this work, is lighter to endure
than his would be. I would not, for any worldly recompense I can
imagine, have him in a moment, however blindly, throw me down from the
station I have held before him all his life, and change me altogether
into something he would cast out of his respect, and think detected and
exposed. Let him do it, if it must be done, when I am not here to see
it. Let me never feel, while I am still alive, that I die before his
face, and utterly perish away from him, like one consumed by lightning
and swallowed by an earthquake.'

Her pride was very strong in her, the pain of it and of her old passions
was very sharp with her, when she thus expressed herself. Not less so,
when she added:

'Even now, I see _you_ shrink from me, as if I had been cruel.'

Little Dorrit could not gainsay it. She tried not to show it, but she
recoiled with dread from the state of mind that had burnt so fiercely
and lasted so long. It presented itself to her, with no sophistry upon
it, in its own plain nature.

'I have done,' said Mrs Clennam,'what it was given to me to do. I have
set myself against evil; not against good. I have been an instrument
of severity against sin. Have not mere sinners like myself been
commissioned to lay it low in all time?'

'In all time?' repeated Little Dorrit.

'Even if my own wrong had prevailed with me, and my own vengeance had
moved me, could I have found no justification? None in the old days
when the innocent perished with the guilty, a thousand to one? When the
wrath of the hater of the unrighteous was not slaked even in blood, and
yet found favour?'

'O, Mrs Clennam, Mrs Clennam,' said Little Dorrit, 'angry feelings and
unforgiving deeds are no comfort and no guide to you and me. My life
has been passed in this poor prison, and my teaching has been very
defective; but let me implore you to remember later and better days.
Be guided only by the healer of the sick, the raiser of the dead, the
friend of all who were afflicted and forlorn, the patient Master who
shed tears of compassion for our infirmities. We cannot but be right if
we put all the rest away, and do everything in remembrance of Him. There
is no vengeance and no infliction of suffering in His life, I am sure.
There can be no confusion in following Him, and seeking for no other
footsteps, I am certain.'

In the softened light of the window, looking from the scene of her early
trials to the shining sky, she was not in stronger opposition to the
black figure in the shade than the life and doctrine on which she rested
were to that figure's history. It bent its head low again, and said not
a word. It remained thus, until the first warning bell began to ring.

'Hark!' cried Mrs Clennam starting, 'I said I had another petition.
It is one that does not admit of delay. The man who brought you this
packet and possesses these proofs, is now waiting at my house to be
bought off. I can keep this from Arthur, only by buying him off. He
asks a large sum; more than I can get together to pay him without having
time. He refuses to make any abatement, because his threat is, that if
he fails with me, he will come to you. Will you return with me and show
him that you already know it? Will you return with me and try to prevail
with him? Will you come and help me with him? Do not refuse what I ask
in Arthur's name, though I dare not ask it for Arthur's sake!'

Little Dorrit yielded willingly. She glided away into the prison for a
few moments, returned, and said she was ready to go. They went out
by another staircase, avoiding the lodge; and coming into the front
court-yard, now all quiet and deserted, gained the street.

It was one of those summer evenings when there is no greater darkness
than a long twilight. The vista of street and bridge was plain to see,
and the sky was serene and beautiful. People stood and sat at their
doors, playing with children and enjoying the evening; numbers were
walking for air; the worry of the day had almost worried itself out, and
few but themselves were hurried. As they crossed the bridge, the clear
steeples of the many churches looked as if they had advanced out of the
murk that usually enshrouded them, and come much nearer. The smoke that
rose into the sky had lost its dingy hue and taken a brightness upon it.
The beauties of the sunset had not faded from the long light films of
cloud that lay at peace in the horizon. From a radiant centre, over
the whole length and breadth of the tranquil firmament, great shoots of
light streamed among the early stars, like signs of the blessed later
covenant of peace and hope that changed the crown of thorns into a
glory.

Less remarkable, now that she was not alone and it was darker, Mrs
Clennam hurried on at Little Dorrit's side, unmolested. They left the
great thoroughfare at the turning by which she had entered it, and wound
their way down among the silent, empty, cross-streets. Their feet were
at the gateway, when there was a sudden noise like thunder.

'What was that! Let us make haste in,' cried Mrs Clennam.

They were in the gateway. Little Dorrit, with a piercing cry, held her
back.

In one swift instant the old house was before them, with the man lying
smoking in the window; another thundering sound, and it heaved, surged
outward, opened asunder in fifty places, collapsed, and fell. Deafened
by the noise, stifled, choked, and blinded by the dust, they hid their
faces and stood rooted to the spot. The dust storm, driving between them
and the placid sky, parted for a moment and showed them the stars. As
they looked up, wildly crying for help, the great pile of chimneys,
which was then alone left standing like a tower in a whirlwind, rocked,
broke, and hailed itself down upon the heap of ruin, as if every
tumbling fragment were intent on burying the crushed wretch deeper.

So blackened by the flying particles of rubbish as to be unrecognisable,
they ran back from the gateway into the street, crying and shrieking.
There, Mrs Clennam dropped upon the stones; and she never from that hour
moved so much as a finger again, or had the power to speak one word.
For upwards of three years she reclined in a wheeled chair, looking
attentively at those about her and appearing to understand what they
said; but the rigid silence she had so long held was evermore enforced
upon her, and except that she could move her eyes and faintly express a
negative and affirmative with her head, she lived and died a statue.

Affery had been looking for them at the prison, and had caught sight
of them at a distance on the bridge. She came up to receive her old
mistress in her arms, to help to carry her into a neighbouring house,
and to be faithful to her. The mystery of the noises was out now;
Affery, like greater people, had always been right in her facts, and
always wrong in the theories she deduced from them.

When the storm of dust had cleared away and the summer night was calm
again, numbers of people choked up every avenue of access, and parties
of diggers were formed to relieve one another in digging among the
ruins. There had been a hundred people in the house at the time of its
fall, there had been fifty, there had been fifteen, there had been
two. Rumour finally settled the number at two; the foreigner and Mr
Flintwinch.

The diggers dug all through the short night by flaring pipes of gas, and
on a level with the early sun, and deeper and deeper below it as it rose
into its zenith, and aslant of it as it declined, and on a level with it
again as it departed. Sturdy digging, and shovelling, and carrying away,
in carts, barrows, and baskets, went on without intermission, by night
and by day; but it was night for the second time when they found the
dirty heap of rubbish that had been the foreigner before his head had
been shivered to atoms, like so much glass, by the great beam that lay
upon him, crushing him.

Still, they had not come upon Flintwinch yet; so the sturdy digging and
shovelling and carrying away went on without intermission by night and
by day. It got about that the old house had had famous cellarage (which
indeed was true), and that Flintwinch had been in a cellar at the
moment, or had had time to escape into one, and that he was safe under
its strong arch, and even that he had been heard to cry, in hollow,
subterranean, suffocated notes, 'Here I am!' At the opposite extremity
of the town it was even known that the excavators had been able to open
a communication with him through a pipe, and that he had received both
soup and brandy by that channel, and that he had said with admirable
fortitude that he was All right, my lads, with the exception of his
collar-bone. But the digging and shovelling and carrying away went on
without intermission, until the ruins were all dug out, and the cellars
opened to the light; and still no Flintwinch, living or dead, all right
or all wrong, had been turned up by pick or spade.

It began then to be perceived that Flintwinch had not been there at the
time of the fall; and it began then to be perceived that he had been
rather busy elsewhere, converting securities into as much money as could
be got for them on the shortest notice, and turning to his own exclusive
account his authority to act for the Firm. Affery, remembering that the
clever one had said he would explain himself further in four-and-twenty
hours' time, determined for her part that his taking himself off within
that period with all he could get, was the final satisfactory sum and
substance of his promised explanation; but she held her peace, devoutly
thankful to be quit of him. As it seemed reasonable to conclude that a
man who had never been buried could not be unburied, the diggers gave
him up when their task was done, and did not dig down for him into the
depths of the earth.

This was taken in ill part by a great many people, who persisted
in believing that Flintwinch was lying somewhere among the London
geological formation. Nor was their belief much shaken by repeated
intelligence which came over in course of time, that an old man who wore
the tie of his neckcloth under one ear, and who was very well known to
be an Englishman, consorted with the Dutchmen on the quaint banks of the
canals of the Hague and in the drinking-shops of Amsterdam, under the
style and designation of Mynheer von Flyntevynge.




CHAPTER 32. Going


Arthur continuing to lie very ill in the Marshalsea, and Mr Rugg
descrying no break in the legal sky affording a hope of his enlargement,
Mr Pancks suffered desperately from self-reproaches. If it had not been
for those infallible figures which proved that Arthur, instead of pining
in imprisonment, ought to be promenading in a carriage and pair, and
that Mr Pancks, instead of being restricted to his clerkly wages, ought
to have from three to five thousand pounds of his own at his immediate
disposal, that unhappy arithmetician would probably have taken to his
bed, and there have made one of the many obscure persons who turned
their faces to the wall and died, as a last sacrifice to the late Mr
Merdle's greatness. Solely supported by his unimpugnable calculations,
Mr Pancks led an unhappy and restless life; constantly carrying his
figures about with him in his hat, and not only going over them himself
on every possible occasion, but entreating every human being he could
lay hold of to go over them with him, and observe what a clear case it
was. Down in Bleeding Heart Yard there was scarcely an inhabitant of
note to whom Mr Pancks had not imparted his demonstration, and, as
figures are catching, a kind of cyphering measles broke out in that
locality, under the influence of which the whole Yard was light-headed.

The more restless Mr Pancks grew in his mind, the more impatient he
became of the Patriarch. In their later conferences his snorting assumed
an irritable sound which boded the Patriarch no good; likewise, Mr
Pancks had on several occasions looked harder at the Patriarchal bumps
than was quite reconcilable with the fact of his not being a painter, or
a peruke-maker in search of the living model.

However, he steamed in and out of his little back Dock according as he
was wanted or not wanted in the Patriarchal presence, and business had
gone on in its customary course. Bleeding Heart Yard had been harrowed
by Mr Pancks, and cropped by Mr Casby, at the regular seasons; Mr Pancks
had taken all the drudgery and all the dirt of the business as _his_
share; Mr Casby had taken all the profits, all the ethereal vapour, and
all the moonshine, as his share; and, in the form of words which that
benevolent beamer generally employed on Saturday evenings, when he
twirled his fat thumbs after striking the week's balance, 'everything
had been satisfactory to all parties--all parties--satisfactory, sir, to
all parties.'

The Dock of the Steam-Tug, Pancks, had a leaden roof, which, frying in
the very hot sunshine, may have heated the vessel. Be that as it
may, one glowing Saturday evening, on being hailed by the lumbering
bottle-green ship, the Tug instantly came working out of the Dock in a
highly heated condition.

'Mr Pancks,' was the Patriarchal remark, 'you have been remiss, you have
been remiss, sir.'

'What do you mean by that?' was the short rejoinder.

The Patriarchal state, always a state of calmness and composure, was
so particularly serene that evening as to be provoking. Everybody else
within the bills of mortality was hot; but the Patriarch was perfectly
cool. Everybody was thirsty, and the Patriarch was drinking. There was
a fragrance of limes or lemons about him; and he made a drink of golden
sherry, which shone in a large tumbler as if he were drinking the
evening sunshine. This was bad, but not the worst. The worst was, that
with his big blue eyes, and his polished head, and his long white hair,
and his bottle-green legs stretched out before him, terminating in his
easy shoes easily crossed at the instep, he had a radiant appearance
of having in his extensive benevolence made the drink for the human
species, while he himself wanted nothing but his own milk of human
kindness.

Wherefore, Mr Pancks said, 'What do you mean by that?' and put his hair
up with both hands, in a highly portentous manner.

'I mean, Mr Pancks, that you must be sharper with the people, sharper
with the people, much sharper with the people, sir. You don't squeeze
them. You don't squeeze them. Your receipts are not up to the mark. You
must squeeze them, sir, or our connection will not continue to be as
satisfactory as I could wish it to be to all parties. All parties.'

'_Don't_ I squeeze 'em?' retorted Mr Pancks. 'What else am I made for?'

'You are made for nothing else, Mr Pancks. You are made to do your
duty, but you don't do your duty. You are paid to squeeze, and you
must squeeze to pay.' The Patriarch so much surprised himself by this
brilliant turn, after Dr Johnson, which he had not in the least
expected or intended, that he laughed aloud; and repeated with great
satisfaction, as he twirled his thumbs and nodded at his youthful
portrait, 'Paid to squeeze, sir, and must squeeze to pay.'

'Oh,' said Pancks. 'Anything more?'

'Yes, sir, yes, sir. Something more. You will please, Mr Pancks, to
squeeze the Yard again, the first thing on Monday morning.'

'Oh!' said Pancks. 'Ain't that too soon? I squeezed it dry to-day.'

'Nonsense, sir. Not near the mark, not near the mark.'

'Oh!' said Pancks, watching him as he benevolently gulped down a good
draught of his mixture. 'Anything more?'

'Yes, sir, yes, sir, something more. I am not at all pleased, Mr Pancks,
with my daughter; not at all pleased. Besides calling much too often
to inquire for Mrs Clennam, Mrs Clennam, who is not just now in
circumstances that are by any means calculated to--to be satisfactory to
all parties, she goes, Mr Pancks, unless I am much deceived, to inquire
for Mr Clennam in jail. In jail.'

'He's laid up, you know,' said Pancks. 'Perhaps it's kind.'

'Pooh, pooh, Mr Pancks. She has nothing to do with that, nothing to do
with that. I can't allow it. Let him pay his debts and come out, come
out; pay his debts, and come out.'

Although Mr Pancks's hair was standing up like strong wire, he gave it
another double-handed impulse in the perpendicular direction, and smiled
at his proprietor in a most hideous manner.

'You will please to mention to my daughter, Mr Pancks, that I can't
allow it, can't allow it,' said the Patriarch blandly.

'Oh!' said Pancks. 'You couldn't mention it yourself?'

'No, sir, no; you are paid to mention it,' the blundering old booby
could not resist the temptation of trying it again, 'and you must
mention it to pay, mention it to pay.'

'Oh!' said Pancks. 'Anything more?'

'Yes, sir. It appears to me, Mr Pancks, that you yourself are too often
and too much in that direction, that direction. I recommend you, Mr
Pancks, to dismiss from your attention both your own losses and other
people's losses, and to mind your business, mind your business.'

Mr Pancks acknowledged this recommendation with such an extraordinarily
abrupt, short, and loud utterance of the monosyllable 'Oh!' that even
the unwieldy Patriarch moved his blue eyes in something of a hurry, to
look at him. Mr Pancks, with a sniff of corresponding intensity, then
added, 'Anything more?'

'Not at present, sir, not at present. I am going,' said the Patriarch,
finishing his mixture, and rising with an amiable air, 'to take a little
stroll, a little stroll. Perhaps I shall find you here when I come back.
If not, sir, duty, duty; squeeze, squeeze, squeeze, on Monday; squeeze
on Monday!'

Mr Pancks, after another stiffening of his hair, looked on at the
Patriarchal assumption of the broad-brimmed hat, with a momentary
appearance of indecision contending with a sense of injury. He was also
hotter than at first, and breathed harder. But he suffered Mr Casby to
go out, without offering any further remark, and then took a peep at
him over the little green window-blinds. 'I thought so,' he observed. 'I
knew where you were bound to. Good!' He then steamed back to his Dock,
put it carefully in order, took down his hat, looked round the Dock,
said 'Good-bye!' and puffed away on his own account. He steered straight
for Mrs Plornish's end of Bleeding Heart Yard, and arrived there, at the
top of the steps, hotter than ever.

At the top of the steps, resisting Mrs Plornish's invitations to come
and sit along with father in Happy Cottage--which to his relief were not
so numerous as they would have been on any other night than Saturday,
when the connection who so gallantly supported the business with
everything but money gave their orders freely--at the top of the steps
Mr Pancks remained until he beheld the Patriarch, who always entered
the Yard at the other end, slowly advancing, beaming, and surrounded
by suitors. Then Mr Pancks descended and bore down upon him, with his
utmost pressure of steam on.

The Patriarch, approaching with his usual benignity, was surprised to
see Mr Pancks, but supposed him to have been stimulated to an immediate
squeeze instead of postponing that operation until Monday. The
population of the Yard were astonished at the meeting, for the two
powers had never been seen there together, within the memory of the
oldest Bleeding Heart. But they were overcome by unutterable amazement
when Mr Pancks, going close up to the most venerable of men and halting
in front of the bottle-green waistcoat, made a trigger of his right
thumb and forefinger, applied the same to the brim of the broad-brimmed
hat, and, with singular smartness and precision, shot it off the
polished head as if it had been a large marble.

Having taken this little liberty with the Patriarchal person, Mr Pancks
further astounded and attracted the Bleeding Hearts by saying in an
audible voice, 'Now, you sugary swindler, I mean to have it out with
you!'

Mr Pancks and the Patriarch were instantly the centre of a press, all
eyes and ears; windows were thrown open, and door-steps were thronged.

'What do you pretend to be?' said Mr Pancks. 'What's your moral game?
What do you go in for? Benevolence, an't it? You benevolent!' Here Mr
Pancks, apparently without the intention of hitting him, but merely to
relieve his mind and expend his superfluous power in wholesome exercise,
aimed a blow at the bumpy head, which the bumpy head ducked to
avoid. This singular performance was repeated, to the ever-increasing
admiration of the spectators, at the end of every succeeding article of
Mr Pancks's oration.

'I have discharged myself from your service,' said Pancks, 'that I may
tell you what you are. You're one of a lot of impostors that are the
worst lot of all the lots to be met with. Speaking as a sufferer by
both, I don't know that I wouldn't as soon have the Merdle lot as your
lot. You're a driver in disguise, a screwer by deputy, a wringer, and
squeezer, and shaver by substitute. You're a philanthropic sneak. You're
a shabby deceiver!'

(The repetition of the performance at this point was received with a
burst of laughter.)

'Ask these good people who's the hard man here. They'll tell you Pancks,
I believe.'

This was confirmed with cries of 'Certainly,' and 'Hear!'

'But I tell you, good people--Casby! This mound of meekness, this lump
of love, this bottle-green smiler, this is your driver!' said Pancks.
'If you want to see the man who would flay you alive--here he is! Don't
look for him in me, at thirty shillings a week, but look for him in
Casby, at I don't know how much a year!'

'Good!' cried several voices. 'Hear Mr Pancks!'

'Hear Mr Pancks?' cried that gentleman (after repeating the popular
performance). 'Yes, I should think so! It's almost time to hear Mr
Pancks. Mr Pancks has come down into the Yard to-night on purpose that
you should hear him. Pancks is only the Works; but here's the Winder!'

The audience would have gone over to Mr Pancks, as one man, woman, and
child, but for the long, grey, silken locks, and the broad-brimmed hat.

'Here's the Stop,' said Pancks, 'that sets the tune to be ground. And
there is but one tune, and its name is Grind, Grind, Grind! Here's the
Proprietor, and here's his Grubber. Why, good people, when he comes
smoothly spinning through the Yard to-night, like a slow-going
benevolent Humming-Top, and when you come about him with your complaints
of the Grubber, you don't know what a cheat the Proprietor is! What do
you think of his showing himself to-night, that I may have all the blame
on Monday? What do you think of his having had me over the coals this
very evening, because I don't squeeze you enough? What do you think of
my being, at the present moment, under special orders to squeeze you dry
on Monday?'

The reply was given in a murmur of 'Shame!' and 'Shabby!'

'Shabby?' snorted Pancks. 'Yes, I should think so! The lot that your
Casby belongs to, is the shabbiest of all the lots. Setting their
Grubbers on, at a wretched pittance, to do what they're ashamed and
afraid to do and pretend not to do, but what they will have done, or
give a man no rest! Imposing on you to give their Grubbers nothing but
blame, and to give them nothing but credit! Why, the worst-looking
cheat in all this town who gets the value of eighteenpence under false
pretences, an't half such a cheat as this sign-post of The Casby's Head
here!'

Cries of 'That's true!' and 'No more he an't!'

'And see what you get of these fellows, besides,' said Pancks. 'See what
more you get of these precious Humming-Tops, revolving among you with
such smoothness that you've no idea of the pattern painted on 'em, or
the little window in 'em. I wish to call your attention to myself for a
moment. I an't an agreeable style of chap, I know that very well.'

The auditory were divided on this point; its more uncompromising members
crying, 'No, you are not,' and its politer materials, 'Yes, you are.'

'I am, in general,' said Mr Pancks, 'a dry, uncomfortable, dreary
Plodder and Grubber. That's your humble servant. There's his full-length
portrait, painted by himself and presented to you, warranted a likeness!
But what's a man to be, with such a man as this for his Proprietor?
What can be expected of him? Did anybody ever find boiled mutton and
caper-sauce growing in a cocoa-nut?'

None of the Bleeding Hearts ever had, it was clear from the alacrity of
their response.

'Well,' said Mr Pancks, 'and neither will you find in Grubbers like
myself, under Proprietors like this, pleasant qualities. I've been a
Grubber from a boy. What has my life been? Fag and grind, fag and grind,
turn the wheel, turn the wheel! I haven't been agreeable to myself,
and I haven't been likely to be agreeable to anybody else. If I was a
shilling a week less useful in ten years' time, this impostor would give
me a shilling a week less; if as useful a man could be got at sixpence
cheaper, he would be taken in my place at sixpence cheaper. Bargain and
sale, bless you! Fixed principles! It's a mighty fine sign-post, is The
Casby's Head,' said Mr Pancks, surveying it with anything rather than
admiration; 'but the real name of the House is the Sham's Arms. Its
motto is, Keep the Grubber always at it. Is any gentleman present,' said
Mr Pancks, breaking off and looking round, 'acquainted with the English
Grammar?'

Bleeding Heart Yard was shy of claiming that acquaintance.

'It's no matter,' said Mr Pancks, 'I merely wish to remark that the task
this Proprietor has set me, has been never to leave off conjugating the
Imperative Mood Present Tense of the verb To keep always at it. Keep
thou always at it. Let him keep always at it. Keep we or do we keep
always at it. Keep ye or do ye or you keep always at it. Let them keep
always at it. Here is your benevolent Patriarch of a Casby, and there is
his golden rule. He is uncommonly improving to look at, and I am not
at all so. He is as sweet as honey, and I am as dull as ditch-water. He
provides the pitch, and I handle it, and it sticks to me. Now,' said
Mr Pancks, closing upon his late Proprietor again, from whom he had
withdrawn a little for the better display of him to the Yard; 'as I am
not accustomed to speak in public, and as I have made a rather lengthy
speech, all circumstances considered, I shall bring my observations to a
close by requesting you to get out of this.'

The Last of the Patriarchs had been so seized by assault, and required
so much room to catch an idea in, an so much more room to turn it in,
that he had not a word to offer in reply. He appeared to be meditating
some Patriarchal way out of his delicate position, when Mr Pancks, once
more suddenly applying the trigger to his hat, shot it off again with
his former dexterity. On the preceding occasion, one or two of the
Bleeding Heart Yarders had obsequiously picked it up and handed it to
its owner; but Mr Pancks had now so far impressed his audience, that the
Patriarch had to turn and stoop for it himself.

Quick as lightning, Mr Pancks, who, for some moments, had had his right
hand in his coat pocket, whipped out a pair of shears, swooped upon the
Patriarch behind, and snipped off short the sacred locks that flowed
upon his shoulders. In a paroxysm of animosity and rapidity, Mr Pancks
then caught the broad-brimmed hat out of the astounded Patriarch's hand,
cut it down into a mere stewpan, and fixed it on the Patriarch's head.

Before the frightful results of this desperate action, Mr Pancks himself
recoiled in consternation. A bare-polled, goggle-eyed, big-headed
lumbering personage stood staring at him, not in the least impressive,
not in the least venerable, who seemed to have started out of the
earth to ask what was become of Casby. After staring at this phantom in
return, in silent awe, Mr Pancks threw down his shears, and fled for a
place of hiding, where he might lie sheltered from the consequences of
his crime. Mr Pancks deemed it prudent to use all possible despatch in
making off, though he was pursued by nothing but the sound of laughter
in Bleeding Heart Yard, rippling through the air and making it ring
again.




CHAPTER 33. Going!


The changes of a fevered room are slow and fluctuating; but the changes
of the fevered world are rapid and irrevocable.

It was Little Dorrit's lot to wait upon both kinds of change. The
Marshalsea walls, during a portion of every day, again embraced her in
their shadows as their child, while she thought for Clennam, worked for
him, watched him, and only left him, still to devote her utmost love and
care to him. Her part in the life outside the gate urged its pressing
claims upon her too, and her patience untiringly responded to them.
Here was Fanny, proud, fitful, whimsical, further advanced in that
disqualified state for going into society which had so much fretted
her on the evening of the tortoise-shell knife, resolved always to want
comfort, resolved not to be comforted, resolved to be deeply wronged,
and resolved that nobody should have the audacity to think her so. Here
was her brother, a weak, proud, tipsy, young old man, shaking from
head to foot, talking as indistinctly as if some of the money he plumed
himself upon had got into his mouth and couldn't be got out, unable to
walk alone in any act of his life, and patronising the sister whom he
selfishly loved (he always had that negative merit, ill-starred and
ill-launched Tip!) because he suffered her to lead him. Here was Mrs
Merdle in gauzy mourning--the original cap whereof had possibly been
rent to pieces in a fit of grief, but had certainly yielded to a highly
becoming article from the Parisian market--warring with Fanny foot to
foot, and breasting her with her desolate bosom every hour in the day.
Here was poor Mr Sparkler, not knowing how to keep the peace between
them, but humbly inclining to the opinion that they could do no better
than agree that they were both remarkably fine women, and that there was
no nonsense about either of them--for which gentle recommendation they
united in falling upon him frightfully. Then, too, here was Mrs General,
got home from foreign parts, sending a Prune and a Prism by post every
other day, demanding a new Testimonial by way of recommendation to some
vacant appointment or other. Of which remarkable gentlewoman it may be
finally observed, that there surely never was a gentlewoman of whose
transcendent fitness for any vacant appointment on the face of this
earth, so many people were (as the warmth of her Testimonials evinced)
so perfectly satisfied--or who was so very unfortunate in having a
large circle of ardent and distinguished admirers, who never themselves
happened to want her in any capacity.

On the first crash of the eminent Mr Merdle's decease, many important
persons had been unable to determine whether they should cut Mrs Merdle,
or comfort her. As it seemed, however, essential to the strength of
their own case that they should admit her to have been cruelly deceived,
they graciously made the admission, and continued to know her. It
followed that Mrs Merdle, as a woman of fashion and good breeding who
had been sacrificed to the wiles of a vulgar barbarian (for Mr Merdle
was found out from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, the
moment he was found out in his pocket), must be actively championed by
her order for her order's sake. She returned this fealty by causing it
to be understood that she was even more incensed against the felonious
shade of the deceased than anybody else was; thus, on the whole, she
came out of her furnace like a wise woman, and did exceedingly well.

Mr Sparkler's lordship was fortunately one of those shelves on which a
gentleman is considered to be put away for life, unless there should be
reasons for hoisting him up with the Barnacle crane to a more lucrative
height. That patriotic servant accordingly stuck to his colours (the
Standard of four Quarterings), and was a perfect Nelson in respect
of nailing them to the mast. On the profits of his intrepidity, Mrs
Sparkler and Mrs Merdle, inhabiting different floors of the genteel
little temple of inconvenience to which the smell of the day before
yesterday's soup and coach-horses was as constant as Death to man,
arrayed themselves to fight it out in the lists of Society, sworn
rivals. And Little Dorrit, seeing all these things as they developed
themselves, could not but wonder, anxiously, into what back corner of
the genteel establishment Fanny's children would be poked by-and-by, and
who would take care of those unborn little victims.

Arthur being far too ill to be spoken with on subjects of emotion or
anxiety, and his recovery greatly depending on the repose into which
his weakness could be hushed, Little Dorrit's sole reliance during this
heavy period was on Mr Meagles. He was still abroad; but she had written
to him through his daughter, immediately after first seeing Arthur in
the Marshalsea and since, confiding her uneasiness to him on the points
on which she was most anxious, but especially on one. To that one,
the continued absence of Mr Meagles abroad, instead of his comforting
presence in the Marshalsea, was referable.

Without disclosing the precise nature of the documents that had fallen
into Rigaud's hands, Little Dorrit had confided the general outline of
that story to Mr Meagles, to whom she had also recounted his fate. The
old cautious habits of the scales and scoop at once showed Mr Meagles
the importance of recovering the original papers; wherefore he wrote
back to Little Dorrit, strongly confirming her in the solicitude she
expressed on that head, and adding that he would not come over to
England 'without making some attempt to trace them out.'

By this time Mr Henry Gowan had made up his mind that it would be
agreeable to him not to know the Meagleses. He was so considerate as to
lay no injunctions on his wife in that particular; but he mentioned
to Mr Meagles that personally they did not appear to him to get on
together, and that he thought it would be a good thing if--politely, and
without any scene, or anything of that sort--they agreed that they were
the best fellows in the world, but were best apart. Poor Mr Meagles, who
was already sensible that he did not advance his daughter's happiness by
being constantly slighted in her presence, said 'Good, Henry! You are
my Pet's husband; you have displaced me, in the course of nature; if
you wish it, good!' This arrangement involved the contingent advantage,
which perhaps Henry Gowan had not foreseen, that both Mr and Mrs
Meagles were more liberal than before to their daughter, when their
communication was only with her and her young child: and that his high
spirit found itself better provided with money, without being under the
degrading necessity of knowing whence it came.

Mr Meagles, at such a period, naturally seized an occupation with great
ardour. He knew from his daughter the various towns which Rigaud had
been haunting, and the various hotels at which he had been living for
some time back. The occupation he set himself was to visit these with
all discretion and speed, and, in the event of finding anywhere that he
had left a bill unpaid, and a box or parcel behind, to pay such bill,
and bring away such box or parcel.

With no other attendant than Mother, Mr Meagles went upon his
pilgrimage, and encountered a number of adventures. Not the least of his
difficulties was, that he never knew what was said to him, and that he
pursued his inquiries among people who never knew what he said to them.
Still, with an unshaken confidence that the English tongue was somehow
the mother tongue of the whole world, only the people were too stupid
to know it, Mr Meagles harangued innkeepers in the most voluble manner,
entered into loud explanations of the most complicated sort, and utterly
renounced replies in the native language of the respondents, on the
ground that they were 'all bosh.' Sometimes interpreters were called
in; whom Mr Meagles addressed in such idiomatic terms of speech, as
instantly to extinguish and shut up--which made the matter worse. On a
balance of the account, however, it may be doubted whether he lost much;
for, although he found no property, he found so many debts and various
associations of discredit with the proper name, which was the only word
he made intelligible, that he was almost everywhere overwhelmed with
injurious accusations. On no fewer than four occasions the police
were called in to receive denunciations of Mr Meagles as a Knight of
Industry, a good-for-nothing, and a thief, all of which opprobrious
language he bore with the best temper (having no idea what it meant),
and was in the most ignominious manner escorted to steam-boats and
public carriages, to be got rid of, talking all the while, like a
cheerful and fluent Briton as he was, with Mother under his arm.

But, in his own tongue, and in his own head, Mr Meagles was a clear,
shrewd, persevering man. When he had 'worked round,' as he called it, to
Paris in his pilgrimage, and had wholly failed in it so far, he was not
disheartened. 'The nearer to England I follow him, you see, Mother,'
argued Mr Meagles, 'the nearer I am likely to come to the papers,
whether they turn up or no. Because it is only reasonable to conclude
that he would deposit them somewhere where they would be safe from
people over in England, and where they would yet be accessible to
himself, don't you see?'

At Paris Mr Meagles found a letter from Little Dorrit, lying waiting for
him; in which she mentioned that she had been able to talk for a minute
or two with Mr Clennam about this man who was no more; and that when she
told Mr Clennam that his friend Mr Meagles, who was on his way to see
him, had an interest in ascertaining something about the man if he
could, he had asked her to tell Mr Meagles that he had been known
to Miss Wade, then living in such a street at Calais. 'Oho!' said Mr
Meagles.

As soon afterwards as might be in those Diligence days, Mr Meagles
rang the cracked bell at the cracked gate, and it jarred open, and the
peasant-woman stood in the dark doorway, saying, 'Ice-say! Seer! Who?'
In acknowledgment of whose address, Mr Meagles murmured to himself that
there was some sense about these Calais people, who really did know
something of what you and themselves were up to; and returned, 'Miss
Wade, my dear.' He was then shown into the presence of Miss Wade.

'It's some time since we met,' said Mr Meagles, clearing his throat; 'I
hope you have been pretty well, Miss Wade?'

Without hoping that he or anybody else had been pretty well, Miss Wade
asked him to what she was indebted for the honour of seeing him again?
Mr Meagles, in the meanwhile, glanced all round the room without
observing anything in the shape of a box.

'Why, the truth is, Miss Wade,' said Mr Meagles, in a comfortable,
managing, not to say coaxing voice, 'it is possible that you may be able
to throw a light upon a little something that is at present dark. Any
unpleasant bygones between us are bygones, I hope. Can't be helped now.
You recollect my daughter? Time changes so! A mother!'

In his innocence, Mr Meagles could not have struck a worse key-note. He
paused for any expression of interest, but paused in vain.

'That is not the subject you wished to enter on?' she said, after a cold
silence.

'No, no,' returned Mr Meagles. 'No. I thought your good nature might--'

'I thought you knew,' she interrupted, with a smile, 'that my good
nature is not to be calculated upon?'

'Don't say so,' said Mr Meagles; 'you do yourself an injustice. However,
to come to the point.' For he was sensible of having gained nothing
by approaching it in a roundabout way. 'I have heard from my friend
Clennam, who, you will be sorry to hear, has been and still is very
ill--'

He paused again, and again she was silent.

'--that you had some knowledge of one Blandois, lately killed in London
by a violent accident. Now, don't mistake me! I know it was a slight
knowledge,' said Mr Meagles, dexterously forestalling an angry
interruption which he saw about to break. 'I am fully aware of that. It
was a slight knowledge, I know. But the question is,' Mr Meagles's voice
here became comfortable again, 'did he, on his way to England last time,
