
'Why--yes--I believe so,' assented Mr Merdle, putting the spoon aside,
and clumsily hiding each of his hands in the coat-cuff of the other
hand. 'I believe the people in my interest down there will not make any
difficulty.'

'Model people!' said Bar.

'I am glad you approve of them,' said Mr Merdle.

'And the people of those other two places, now,' pursued Bar, with a
bright twinkle in his keen eye, as it slightly turned in the direction
of his magnificent neighbour; 'we lawyers are always curious, always
inquisitive, always picking up odds and ends for our patchwork minds,
since there is no knowing when and where they may fit into some
corner;--the people of those other two places now? Do they yield so
laudably to the vast and cumulative influence of such enterprise and
such renown; do those little rills become absorbed so quietly
and easily, and, as it were by the influence of natural laws, so
beautifully, in the swoop of the majestic stream as it flows upon its
wondrous way enriching the surrounding lands; that their course is
perfectly to be calculated, and distinctly to be predicated?'

Mr Merdle, a little troubled by Bar's eloquence, looked fitfully about
the nearest salt-cellar for some moments, and then said hesitating:

'They are perfectly aware, sir, of their duty to Society. They will
return anybody I send to them for that purpose.'

'Cheering to know,' said Bar. 'Cheering to know.'

The three places in question were three little rotten holes in this
Island, containing three little ignorant, drunken, guzzling, dirty,
out-of-the-way constituencies, that had reeled into Mr Merdle's pocket.
Ferdinand Barnacle laughed in his easy way, and airily said they were
a nice set of fellows. Bishop, mentally perambulating among paths of
peace, was altogether swallowed up in absence of mind.

'Pray,' asked Lord Decimus, casting his eyes around the table, 'what
is this story I have heard of a gentleman long confined in a debtors'
prison proving to be of a wealthy family, and having come into the
inheritance of a large sum of money? I have met with a variety of
allusions to it. Do you know anything of it, Ferdinand?'

'I only know this much,' said Ferdinand, 'that he has given the
Department with which I have the honour to be associated;' this
sparkling young Barnacle threw off the phrase sportively, as who should
say, We know all about these forms of speech, but we must keep it up,
we must keep the game alive; 'no end of trouble, and has put us into
innumerable fixes.'

'Fixes?' repeated Lord Decimus, with a majestic pausing and pondering
on the word that made the bashful Member shut his eyes quite tight.
'Fixes?'

'A very perplexing business indeed,' observed Mr Tite Barnacle, with an
air of grave resentment.

'What,' said Lord Decimus, 'was the character of his business; what was
the nature of these--a--Fixes, Ferdinand?'

'Oh, it's a good story, as a story,' returned that gentleman; 'as good
a thing of its kind as need be. This Mr Dorrit (his name is Dorrit) had
incurred a responsibility to us, ages before the fairy came out of
the Bank and gave him his fortune, under a bond he had signed for the
performance of a contract which was not at all performed. He was a
partner in a house in some large way--spirits, or buttons, or wine, or
blacking, or oatmeal, or woollen, or pork, or hooks and eyes, or iron,
or treacle, or shoes, or something or other that was wanted for troops,
or seamen, or somebody--and the house burst, and we being among
the creditors, detainees were lodged on the part of the Crown in a
scientific manner, and all the rest of it. When the fairy had appeared
and he wanted to pay us off, Egad we had got into such an exemplary
state of checking and counter-checking, signing and counter-signing,
that it was six months before we knew how to take the money, or how to
give a receipt for it. It was a triumph of public business,' said this
handsome young Barnacle, laughing heartily, 'You never saw such a lot of
forms in your life. "Why," the attorney said to me one day, "if I wanted
this office to give me two or three thousand pounds instead of take it,
I couldn't have more trouble about it." "You are right, old fellow,"
I told him, "and in future you'll know that we have something to do
here."' The pleasant young Barnacle finished by once more laughing
heartily. He was a very easy, pleasant fellow indeed, and his manners
were exceedingly winning.

Mr Tite Barnacle's view of the business was of a less airy character. He
took it ill that Mr Dorrit had troubled the Department by wanting to
pay the money, and considered it a grossly informal thing to do after so
many years. But Mr Tite Barnacle was a buttoned-up man, and consequently
a weighty one. All buttoned-up men are weighty. All buttoned-up men are
believed in. Whether or no the reserved and never-exercised power of
unbuttoning, fascinates mankind; whether or no wisdom is supposed to
condense and augment when buttoned up, and to evaporate when unbuttoned;
it is certain that the man to whom importance is accorded is the
buttoned-up man. Mr Tite Barnacle never would have passed for half his
current value, unless his coat had been always buttoned-up to his white
cravat.

'May I ask,' said Lord Decimus, 'if Mr Darrit--or Dorrit--has any
family?'

Nobody else replying, the host said, 'He has two daughters, my lord.'

'Oh! you are acquainted with him?' asked Lord Decimus.

'Mrs Merdle is. Mr Sparkler is, too. In fact,' said Mr Merdle, 'I rather
believe that one of the young ladies has made an impression on Edmund
Sparkler. He is susceptible, and--I--think--the conquest--' Here Mr
Merdle stopped, and looked at the table-cloth, as he usually did when he
found himself observed or listened to.

Bar was uncommonly pleased to find that the Merdle family, and this
family, had already been brought into contact. He submitted, in a low
voice across the table to Bishop, that it was a kind of analogical
illustration of those physical laws, in virtue of which Like flies to
Like. He regarded this power of attraction in wealth to draw wealth
to it, as something remarkably interesting and curious--something
indefinably allied to the loadstone and gravitation. Bishop, who
had ambled back to earth again when the present theme was broached,
acquiesced. He said it was indeed highly important to Society that one
in the trying situation of unexpectedly finding himself invested with a
power for good or for evil in Society, should become, as it were, merged
in the superior power of a more legitimate and more gigantic growth, the
influence of which (as in the case of our friend at whose board we sat)
was habitually exercised in harmony with the best interests of Society.
Thus, instead of two rival and contending flames, a larger and a lesser,
each burning with a lurid and uncertain glare, we had a blended and a
softened light whose genial ray diffused an equable warmth throughout
the land. Bishop seemed to like his own way of putting the case very
much, and rather dwelt upon it; Bar, meanwhile (not to throw away a
jury-man), making a show of sitting at his feet and feeding on his
precepts.

The dinner and dessert being three hours long, the bashful Member cooled
in the shadow of Lord Decimus faster than he warmed with food and drink,
and had but a chilly time of it. Lord Decimus, like a tall tower in a
flat country, seemed to project himself across the table-cloth, hide the
light from the honourable Member, cool the honourable Member's marrow,
and give him a woeful idea of distance. When he asked this unfortunate
traveller to take wine, he encompassed his faltering steps with the
gloomiest of shades; and when he said, 'Your health sir!' all around him
was barrenness and desolation.

At length Lord Decimus, with a coffee-cup in his hand, began to hover
about among the pictures, and to cause an interesting speculation to
arise in all minds as to the probabilities of his ceasing to hover, and
enabling the smaller birds to flutter up-stairs; which could not be
done until he had urged his noble pinions in that direction. After some
delay, and several stretches of his wings which came to nothing, he
soared to the drawing-rooms.

And here a difficulty arose, which always does arise when two people
are specially brought together at a dinner to confer with one another.
Everybody (except Bishop, who had no suspicion of it) knew perfectly
well that this dinner had been eaten and drunk, specifically to the end
that Lord Decimus and Mr Merdle should have five minutes' conversation
together. The opportunity so elaborately prepared was now arrived, and
it seemed from that moment that no mere human ingenuity could so much as
get the two chieftains into the same room. Mr Merdle and his noble guest
persisted in prowling about at opposite ends of the perspective. It was
in vain for the engaging Ferdinand to bring Lord Decimus to look at the
bronze horses near Mr Merdle. Then Mr Merdle evaded, and wandered away.
It was in vain for him to bring Mr Merdle to Lord Decimus to tell him
the history of the unique Dresden vases. Then Lord Decimus evaded and
wandered away, while he was getting his man up to the mark.

'Did you ever see such a thing as this?' said Ferdinand to Bar when he
had been baffled twenty times.

'Often,' returned Bar.

'Unless I butt one of them into an appointed corner, and you butt the
other,' said Ferdinand,'it will not come off after all.'

'Very good,' said Bar. 'I'll butt Merdle, if you like; but not my lord.'

Ferdinand laughed, in the midst of his vexation. 'Confound them both!'
said he, looking at his watch. 'I want to get away. Why the deuce can't
they come together! They both know what they want and mean to do. Look
at them!'

They were still looming at opposite ends of the perspective, each with
an absurd pretence of not having the other on his mind, which could not
have been more transparently ridiculous though his real mind had been
chalked on his back. Bishop, who had just now made a third with Bar and
Ferdinand, but whose innocence had again cut him out of the subject and
washed him in sweet oil, was seen to approach Lord Decimus and glide
into conversation.

'I must get Merdle's doctor to catch and secure him, I suppose,' said
Ferdinand; 'and then I must lay hold of my illustrious kinsman, and
decoy him if I can--drag him if I can't--to the conference.'

'Since you do me the honour,' said Bar, with his slyest smile, to ask
for my poor aid, it shall be yours with the greatest pleasure. I don't
think this is to be done by one man. But if you will undertake to pen
my lord into that furthest drawing-room where he is now so profoundly
engaged, I will undertake to bring our dear Merdle into the presence,
without the possibility of getting away.'

'Done!' said Ferdinand. 'Done!' said Bar.

Bar was a sight wondrous to behold, and full of matter, when, jauntily
waving his double eye-glass by its ribbon, and jauntily drooping to an
Universe of Jurymen, he, in the most accidental manner ever seen,
found himself at Mr Merdle's shoulder, and embraced that opportunity of
mentioning a little point to him, on which he particularly wished to
be guided by the light of his practical knowledge. (Here he took Mr
Merdle's arm and walked him gently away.) A banker, whom we would call
A. B., advanced a considerable sum of money, which we would call fifteen
thousand pounds, to a client or customer of his, whom he would call P.
Q. (Here, as they were getting towards Lord Decimus, he held Mr Merdle
tight.) As a security for the repayment of this advance to P. Q. whom
we would call a widow lady, there were placed in A. B.'s hands the
title-deeds of a freehold estate, which we would call Blinkiter Doddles.
Now, the point was this. A limited right of felling and lopping in
the woods of Blinkiter Doddles, lay in the son of P. Q. then past his
majority, and whom we would call X. Y.--but really this was too bad! In
the presence of Lord Decimus, to detain the host with chopping our dry
chaff of law, was really too bad! Another time! Bar was truly repentant,
and would not say another syllable. Would Bishop favour him with
half-a-dozen words? (He had now set Mr Merdle down on a couch, side by
side with Lord Decimus, and to it they must go, now or never.)

And now the rest of the company, highly excited and interested, always
excepting Bishop, who had not the slightest idea that anything was going
on, formed in one group round the fire in the next drawing-room, and
pretended to be chatting easily on the infinite variety of small topics,
while everybody's thoughts and eyes were secretly straying towards the
secluded pair. The Chorus were excessively nervous, perhaps as labouring
under the dreadful apprehension that some good thing was going to
be diverted from them! Bishop alone talked steadily and evenly. He
conversed with the great Physician on that relaxation of the throat with
which young curates were too frequently afflicted, and on the means
of lessening the great prevalence of that disorder in the church.
Physician, as a general rule, was of opinion that the best way to avoid
it was to know how to read, before you made a profession of reading.
Bishop said dubiously, did he really think so? And Physician said,
decidedly, yes he did.

Ferdinand, meanwhile, was the only one of the party who skirmished on
the outside of the circle; he kept about mid-way between it and the
two, as if some sort of surgical operation were being performed by Lord
Decimus on Mr Merdle, or by Mr Merdle on Lord Decimus, and his services
might at any moment be required as Dresser. In fact, within a quarter
of an hour Lord Decimus called to him 'Ferdinand!' and he went, and
took his place in the conference for some five minutes more. Then a
half-suppressed gasp broke out among the Chorus; for Lord Decimus rose
to take his leave. Again coached up by Ferdinand to the point of making
himself popular, he shook hands in the most brilliant manner with the
whole company, and even said to Bar, 'I hope you were not bored by my
pears?' To which Bar retorted, 'Eton, my lord, or Parliamentary?' neatly
showing that he had mastered the joke, and delicately insinuating that
he could never forget it while his life remained.

All the grave importance that was buttoned up in Mr Tite Barnacle, took
itself away next; and Ferdinand took himself away next, to the opera.
Some of the rest lingered a little, marrying golden liqueur glasses to
Buhl tables with sticky rings; on the desperate chance of Mr Merdle's
saying something. But Merdle, as usual, oozed sluggishly and muddily
about his drawing-room, saying never a word.

In a day or two it was announced to all the town, that Edmund Sparkler,
Esquire, son-in-law of the eminent Mr Merdle of worldwide renown, was
made one of the Lords of the Circumlocution Office; and proclamation was
issued, to all true believers, that this admirable appointment was to
be hailed as a graceful and gracious mark of homage, rendered by the
graceful and gracious Decimus, to that commercial interest which must
ever in a great commercial country--and all the rest of it, with
blast of trumpet. So, bolstered by this mark of Government homage, the
wonderful Bank and all the other wonderful undertakings went on and went
up; and gapers came to Harley Street, Cavendish Square, only to look at
the house where the golden wonder lived.

And when they saw the Chief Butler looking out at the hall-door in
his moments of condescension, the gapers said how rich he looked, and
wondered how much money he had in the wonderful Bank. But, if they had
known that respectable Nemesis better, they would not have wondered
about it, and might have stated the amount with the utmost precision.




CHAPTER 13. The Progress of an Epidemic


That it is at least as difficult to stay a moral infection as a physical
one; that such a disease will spread with the malignity and rapidity of
the Plague; that the contagion, when it has once made head, will spare
no pursuit or condition, but will lay hold on people in the soundest
health, and become developed in the most unlikely constitutions: is
a fact as firmly established by experience as that we human creatures
breathe an atmosphere. A blessing beyond appreciation would be conferred
upon mankind, if the tainted, in whose weakness or wickedness these
virulent disorders are bred, could be instantly seized and placed in
close confinement (not to say summarily smothered) before the poison is
communicable.

As a vast fire will fill the air to a great distance with its roar, so
the sacred flame which the mighty Barnacles had fanned caused the air to
resound more and more with the name of Merdle. It was deposited on every
lip, and carried into every ear. There never was, there never had
been, there never again should be, such a man as Mr Merdle. Nobody,
as aforesaid, knew what he had done; but everybody knew him to be the
greatest that had appeared.

Down in Bleeding Heart Yard, where there was not one unappropriated
halfpenny, as lively an interest was taken in this paragon of men as on
the Stock Exchange. Mrs Plornish, now established in the small grocery
and general trade in a snug little shop at the crack end of the Yard,
at the top of the steps, with her little old father and Maggy acting
as assistants, habitually held forth about him over the counter in
conversation with her customers. Mr Plornish, who had a small share in a
small builder's business in the neighbourhood, said, trowel in hand, on
the tops of scaffolds and on the tiles of houses, that people did tell
him as Mr Merdle was _the_ one, mind you, to put us all to rights in
respects of that which all on us looked to, and to bring us all safe
home as much as we needed, mind you, fur toe be brought. Mr Baptist,
sole lodger of Mr and Mrs Plornish was reputed in whispers to lay by
the savings which were the result of his simple and moderate life,
for investment in one of Mr Merdle's certain enterprises. The female
Bleeding Hearts, when they came for ounces of tea, and hundredweights of
talk, gave Mrs Plornish to understand, That how, ma'am, they had heard
from their cousin Mary Anne, which worked in the line, that his lady's
dresses would fill three waggons. That how she was as handsome a lady,
ma'am, as lived, no matter wheres, and a busk like marble itself. That
how, according to what they was told, ma'am, it was her son by a former
husband as was took into the Government; and a General he had been, and
armies he had marched again and victory crowned, if all you heard was to
be believed. That how it was reported that Mr Merdle's words had been,
that if they could have made it worth his while to take the whole
Government he would have took it without a profit, but that take it he
could not and stand a loss. That how it was not to be expected, ma'am,
that he should lose by it, his ways being, as you might say and utter
no falsehood, paved with gold; but that how it was much to be regretted
that something handsome hadn't been got up to make it worth his while;
for it was such and only such that knowed the heighth to which the bread
and butchers' meat had rose, and it was such and only such that both
could and would bring that heighth down.

So rife and potent was the fever in Bleeding Heart Yard, that Mr
Pancks's rent-days caused no interval in the patients. The disease took
the singular form, on those occasions, of causing the infected to find
an unfathomable excuse and consolation in allusions to the magic name.

'Now, then!' Mr Pancks would say, to a defaulting lodger. 'Pay up!
Come on!'

'I haven't got it, Mr Pancks,' Defaulter would reply. 'I tell you the
truth, sir, when I say I haven't got so much as a single sixpence of it
to bless myself with.'

'This won't do, you know,' Mr Pancks would retort. 'You don't expect it
_will_ do; do you?'

Defaulter would admit, with a low-spirited 'No, sir,' having no such
expectation.

'My proprietor isn't going to stand this, you know,' Mr Pancks would
proceed. 'He don't send me here for this. Pay up! Come!'

The Defaulter would make answer, 'Ah, Mr Pancks. If I was the rich
gentleman whose name is in everybody's mouth--if my name was Merdle,
sir--I'd soon pay up, and be glad to do it.'

Dialogues on the rent-question usually took place at the house-doors
or in the entries, and in the presence of several deeply interested
Bleeding Hearts. They always received a reference of this kind with a
low murmur of response, as if it were convincing; and the Defaulter,
however black and discomfited before, always cheered up a little in
making it.

'If I was Mr Merdle, sir, you wouldn't have cause to complain of me
then. No, believe me!' the Defaulter would proceed with a shake of the
head. 'I'd pay up so quick then, Mr Pancks, that you shouldn't have to
ask me.'

The response would be heard again here, implying that it was impossible
to say anything fairer, and that this was the next thing to paying the
money down.

Mr Pancks would be now reduced to saying as he booked the case, 'Well!
You'll have the broker in, and be turned out; that's what'll happen to
you. It's no use talking to me about Mr Merdle. You are not Mr Merdle,
any more than I am.'

'No, sir,' the Defaulter would reply. 'I only wish you _were_ him, sir.'

The response would take this up quickly; replying with great feeling,
'Only wish you _were_ him, sir.'

'You'd be easier with us if you were Mr Merdle, sir,' the Defaulter
would go on with rising spirits, 'and it would be better for all
parties. Better for our sakes, and better for yours, too. You wouldn't
have to worry no one, then, sir. You wouldn't have to worry us, and you
wouldn't have to worry yourself. You'd be easier in your own mind, sir,
and you'd leave others easier, too, you would, if you were Mr Merdle.'

Mr Pancks, in whom these impersonal compliments produced an irresistible
sheepishness, never rallied after such a charge. He could only bite
his nails and puff away to the next Defaulter. The responsive Bleeding
Hearts would then gather round the Defaulter whom he had just abandoned,
and the most extravagant rumours would circulate among them, to their
great comfort, touching the amount of Mr Merdle's ready money.

From one of the many such defeats of one of many rent-days, Mr Pancks,
having finished his day's collection, repaired with his note-book
under his arm to Mrs Plornish's corner. Mr Pancks's object was not
professional, but social. He had had a trying day, and wanted a little
brightening. By this time he was on friendly terms with the Plornish
family, having often looked in upon them at similar seasons, and borne
his part in recollections of Miss Dorrit.

Mrs Plornish's shop-parlour had been decorated under her own eye, and
presented, on the side towards the shop, a little fiction in which Mrs
Plornish unspeakably rejoiced. This poetical heightening of the parlour
consisted in the wall being painted to represent the exterior of a
thatched cottage; the artist having introduced (in as effective a manner
as he found compatible with their highly disproportionate dimensions)
the real door and window. The modest sunflower and hollyhock were
depicted as flourishing with great luxuriance on this rustic dwelling,
while a quantity of dense smoke issuing from the chimney indicated good
cheer within, and also, perhaps, that it had not been lately swept.
A faithful dog was represented as flying at the legs of the friendly
visitor, from the threshold; and a circular pigeon-house, enveloped in a
cloud of pigeons, arose from behind the garden-paling. On the door (when
it was shut), appeared the semblance of a brass-plate, presenting
the inscription, Happy Cottage, T. and M. Plornish; the partnership
expressing man and wife. No Poetry and no Art ever charmed the
imagination more than the union of the two in this counterfeit cottage
charmed Mrs Plornish. It was nothing to her that Plornish had a habit
of leaning against it as he smoked his pipe after work, when his
hat blotted out the pigeon-house and all the pigeons, when his back
swallowed up the dwelling, when his hands in his pockets uprooted the
blooming garden and laid waste the adjacent country. To Mrs Plornish, it
was still a most beautiful cottage, a most wonderful deception; and
it made no difference that Mr Plornish's eye was some inches above the
level of the gable bed-room in the thatch. To come out into the shop
after it was shut, and hear her father sing a song inside this cottage,
was a perfect Pastoral to Mrs Plornish, the Golden Age revived. And
truly if that famous period had been revived, or had ever been at all,
it may be doubted whether it would have produced many more heartily
admiring daughters than the poor woman.

Warned of a visitor by the tinkling bell at the shop-door, Mrs Plornish
came out of Happy Cottage to see who it might be. 'I guessed it was
you, Mr Pancks,' said she, 'for it's quite your regular night; ain't it?
Here's father, you see, come out to serve at the sound of the bell, like
a brisk young shopman. Ain't he looking well? Father's more pleased to
see you than if you was a customer, for he dearly loves a gossip; and
when it turns upon Miss Dorrit, he loves it all the more. You never
heard father in such voice as he is at present,' said Mrs Plornish, her
own voice quavering, she was so proud and pleased. 'He gave us Strephon
last night to that degree that Plornish gets up and makes him this
speech across the table. "John Edward Nandy," says Plornish to father,
"I never heard you come the warbles as I have heard you come the warbles
this night." An't it gratifying, Mr Pancks, though; really?'

Mr Pancks, who had snorted at the old man in his friendliest manner,
replied in the affirmative, and casually asked whether that lively Altro
chap had come in yet? Mrs Plornish answered no, not yet, though he had
gone to the West-End with some work, and had said he should be back
by tea-time. Mr Pancks was then hospitably pressed into Happy Cottage,
where he encountered the elder Master Plornish just come home from
school. Examining that young student, lightly, on the educational
proceedings of the day, he found that the more advanced pupils who
were in the large text and the letter M, had been set the copy 'Merdle,
Millions.'

'And how are _you_ getting on, Mrs Plornish,' said Pancks, 'since we're
mentioning millions?'

'Very steady, indeed, sir,' returned Mrs Plornish. 'Father, dear, would
you go into the shop and tidy the window a little bit before tea, your
taste being so beautiful?'

John Edward Nandy trotted away, much gratified, to comply with his
daughter's request. Mrs Plornish, who was always in mortal terror
of mentioning pecuniary affairs before the old gentleman, lest any
disclosure she made might rouse his spirit and induce him to run away to
the workhouse, was thus left free to be confidential with Mr Pancks.

'It's quite true that the business is very steady indeed,' said Mrs
Plornish, lowering her voice; 'and has a excellent connection. The only
thing that stands in its way, sir, is the Credit.'

This drawback, rather severely felt by most people who engaged in
commercial transactions with the inhabitants of Bleeding Heart Yard,
was a large stumbling-block in Mrs Plornish's trade. When Mr Dorrit had
established her in the business, the Bleeding Hearts had shown an amount
of emotion and a determination to support her in it, that did honour to
human nature. Recognising her claim upon their generous feelings as one
who had long been a member of their community, they pledged themselves,
with great feeling, to deal with Mrs Plornish, come what would and
bestow their patronage on no other establishment. Influenced by these
noble sentiments, they had even gone out of their way to purchase little
luxuries in the grocery and butter line to which they were unaccustomed;
saying to one another, that if they did stretch a point, was it not for
a neighbour and a friend, and for whom ought a point to be stretched if
not for such? So stimulated, the business was extremely brisk, and the
articles in stock went off with the greatest celerity. In short, if the

Bleeding Hearts had but paid, the undertaking would have been a complete
success; whereas, by reason of their exclusively confining themselves to
owing, the profits actually realised had not yet begun to appear in the
books.

Mr Pancks was making a very porcupine of himself by sticking his hair
up in the contemplation of this state of accounts, when old Mr Nandy,
re-entering the cottage with an air of mystery, entreated them to come
and look at the strange behaviour of Mr Baptist, who seemed to have met
with something that had scared him. All three going into the shop, and
watching through the window, then saw Mr Baptist, pale and agitated, go
through the following extraordinary performances. First, he was observed
hiding at the top of the steps leading down into the Yard, and peeping
up and down the street with his head cautiously thrust out close to the
side of the shop-door. After very anxious scrutiny, he came out of
his retreat, and went briskly down the street as if he were going away
altogether; then, suddenly turned about, and went, at the same pace, and
with the same feint, up the street. He had gone no further up the street
than he had gone down, when he crossed the road and disappeared. The
object of this last manoeuvre was only apparent, when his entering the
shop with a sudden twist, from the steps again, explained that he
had made a wide and obscure circuit round to the other, or Doyce and
Clennam, end of the Yard, and had come through the Yard and bolted in.
He was out of breath by that time, as he might well be, and his heart
seemed to jerk faster than the little shop-bell, as it quivered and
jingled behind him with his hasty shutting of the door.

'Hallo, old chap!' said Mr Pancks. 'Altro, old boy! What's the matter?'

Mr Baptist, or Signor Cavalletto, understood English now almost as well
as Mr Pancks himself, and could speak it very well too. Nevertheless,
Mrs Plornish, with a pardonable vanity in that accomplishment of hers
which made her all but Italian, stepped in as interpreter.

'E ask know,' said Mrs Plornish, 'what go wrong?'

'Come into the happy little cottage, Padrona,' returned Mr Baptist,
imparting great stealthiness to his flurried back-handed shake of his
right forefinger. 'Come there!'

Mrs Plornish was proud of the title Padrona, which she regarded as
signifying: not so much Mistress of the house, as Mistress of the
Italian tongue. She immediately complied with Mr Baptist's request, and
they all went into the cottage.

'E ope you no fright,' said Mrs Plornish then, interpreting Mr Pancks
in a new way with her usual fertility of resource. 'What appen? Peaka
Padrona!'

'I have seen some one,' returned Baptist. 'I have rincontrato him.'

'Im? Oo him?' asked Mrs Plornish.

'A bad man. A baddest man. I have hoped that I should never see him
again.'

'Ow you know him bad?' asked Mrs Plornish.

'It does not matter, Padrona. I know it too well.'

'E see you?' asked Mrs Plornish.

'No. I hope not. I believe not.'

'He says,' Mrs Plornish then interpreted, addressing her father and
Pancks with mild condescension, 'that he has met a bad man, but he hopes
the bad man didn't see him--Why,' inquired Mrs Plornish, reverting to
the Italian language, 'why ope bad man no see?'

'Padrona, dearest,' returned the little foreigner whom she so
considerately protected, 'do not ask, I pray. Once again I say it
matters not. I have fear of this man. I do not wish to see him, I do not
wish to be known of him--never again! Enough, most beautiful. Leave it.'

The topic was so disagreeable to him, and so put his usual liveliness to
the rout, that Mrs Plornish forbore to press him further: the rather as
the tea had been drawing for some time on the hob. But she was not the
less surprised and curious for asking no more questions; neither was
Mr Pancks, whose expressive breathing had been labouring hard since the
entrance of the little man, like a locomotive engine with a great load
getting up a steep incline. Maggy, now better dressed than of yore,
though still faithful to the monstrous character of her cap, had been
in the background from the first with open mouth and eyes, which staring
and gaping features were not diminished in breadth by the untimely
suppression of the subject. However, no more was said about it, though
much appeared to be thought on all sides: by no means excepting the two
young Plornishes, who partook of the evening meal as if their eating
the bread and butter were rendered almost superfluous by the painful
probability of the worst of men shortly presenting himself for the
purpose of eating them. Mr Baptist, by degrees began to chirp a little;
but never stirred from the seat he had taken behind the door and close
to the window, though it was not his usual place. As often as the little
bell rang, he started and peeped out secretly, with the end of the
little curtain in his hand and the rest before his face; evidently not
at all satisfied but that the man he dreaded had tracked him through all
his doublings and turnings, with the certainty of a terrible bloodhound.

The entrance, at various times, of two or three customers and of Mr
Plornish, gave Mr Baptist just enough of this employment to keep the
attention of the company fixed upon him. Tea was over, and the children
were abed, and Mrs Plornish was feeling her way to the dutiful proposal
that her father should favour them with Chloe, when the bell rang again,
and Mr Clennam came in.

Clennam had been poring late over his books and letters; for the
waiting-rooms of the Circumlocution Office ravaged his time sorely.
Over and above that, he was depressed and made uneasy by the late
occurrence at his mother's. He looked worn and solitary. He felt so,
too; but, nevertheless, was returning home from his counting-house by
that end of the Yard to give them the intelligence that he had received
another letter from Miss Dorrit.

The news made a sensation in the cottage which drew off the general
attention from Mr Baptist. Maggy, who pushed her way into the foreground
immediately, would have seemed to draw in the tidings of her Little
Mother equally at her ears, nose, mouth, and eyes, but that the last
were obstructed by tears. She was particularly delighted when Clennam
assured her that there were hospitals, and very kindly conducted
hospitals, in Rome. Mr Pancks rose into new distinction in virtue of
being specially remembered in the letter. Everybody was pleased and
interested, and Clennam was well repaid for his trouble.

'But you are tired, sir. Let me make you a cup of tea,' said Mrs
Plornish, 'if you'd condescend to take such a thing in the cottage; and
many thanks to you, too, I am sure, for bearing us in mind so kindly.'

Mr Plornish deeming it incumbent on him, as host, to add his personal
acknowledgments, tendered them in the form which always expressed his
highest ideal of a combination of ceremony with sincerity.

'John Edward Nandy,' said Mr Plornish, addressing the old gentleman.
'Sir. It's not too often that you see unpretending actions without a
spark of pride, and therefore when you see them give grateful honour
unto the same, being that if you don't, and live to want 'em, it follows
serve you right.'

To which Mr Nandy replied:

'I am heartily of your opinion, Thomas, and which your opinion is the
same as mine, and therefore no more words and not being backwards
with that opinion, which opinion giving it as yes, Thomas, yes, is the
opinion in which yourself and me must ever be unanimously jined by all,
and where there is not difference of opinion there can be none but one
opinion, which fully no, Thomas, Thomas, no!'

Arthur, with less formality, expressed himself gratified by their high
appreciation of so very slight an attention on his part; and explained
as to the tea that he had not yet dined, and was going straight home to
refresh after a long day's labour, or he would have readily accepted the
hospitable offer. As Mr Pancks was somewhat noisily getting his steam
up for departure, he concluded by asking that gentleman if he would walk
with him? Mr Pancks said he desired no better engagement, and the two
took leave of Happy Cottage.

'If you will come home with me, Pancks,' said Arthur, when they got into
the street, 'and will share what dinner or supper there is, it will
be next door to an act of charity; for I am weary and out of sorts
to-night.'

'Ask me to do a greater thing than that,' said Pancks, 'when you want it
done, and I'll do it.'

Between this eccentric personage and Clennam, a tacit understanding and
accord had been always improving since Mr Pancks flew over Mr Rugg's
back in the Marshalsea Yard. When the carriage drove away on the
memorable day of the family's departure, these two had looked after it
together, and had walked slowly away together. When the first letter
came from little Dorrit, nobody was more interested in hearing of
her than Mr Pancks. The second letter, at that moment in Clennam's
breast-pocket, particularly remembered him by name. Though he had never
before made any profession or protestation to Clennam, and though what
he had just said was little enough as to the words in which it was
expressed, Clennam had long had a growing belief that Mr Pancks, in
his own odd way, was becoming attached to him. All these strings
intertwining made Pancks a very cable of anchorage that night.

'I am quite alone,' Arthur explained as they walked on. 'My partner is
away, busily engaged at a distance on his branch of our business, and
you shall do just as you like.'

'Thank you. You didn't take particular notice of little Altro just now;
did you?' said Pancks.

'No. Why?'

'He's a bright fellow, and I like him,' said Pancks. 'Something has
gone amiss with him to-day. Have you any idea of any cause that can have
overset him?'

'You surprise me! None whatever.'

Mr Pancks gave his reasons for the inquiry. Arthur was quite unprepared
for them, and quite unable to suggest an explanation of them.

'Perhaps you'll ask him,' said Pancks, 'as he's a stranger?'

'Ask him what?' returned Clennam.

'What he has on his mind.'

'I ought first to see for myself that he has something on his mind, I
think,' said Clennam. 'I have found him in every way so diligent, so
grateful (for little enough), and so trustworthy, that it might look
like suspecting him. And that would be very unjust.'

'True,' said Pancks. 'But, I say! You oughtn't to be anybody's
proprietor, Mr Clennam. You're much too delicate.'

'For the matter of that,' returned Clennam laughing, 'I have not a large
proprietary share in Cavalletto. His carving is his livelihood. He keeps
the keys of the Factory, watches it every alternate night, and acts as a
sort of housekeeper to it generally; but we have little work in the way
of his ingenuity, though we give him what we have. No! I am rather his
adviser than his proprietor. To call me his standing counsel and his
banker would be nearer the fact. Speaking of being his banker, is it not
curious, Pancks, that the ventures which run just now in so many
people's heads, should run even in little Cavalletto's?'

'Ventures?' retorted Pancks, with a snort. 'What ventures?'

'These Merdle enterprises.'

'Oh! Investments,' said Pancks. 'Ay, ay! I didn't know you were speaking
of investments.'

His quick way of replying caused Clennam to look at him, with a doubt
whether he meant more than he said. As it was accompanied, however, with
a quickening of his pace and a corresponding increase in the labouring
of his machinery, Arthur did not pursue the matter, and they soon
arrived at his house.

A dinner of soup and a pigeon-pie, served on a little round table before
the fire, and flavoured with a bottle of good wine, oiled Mr Pancks's
works in a highly effective manner; so that when Clennam produced his
Eastern pipe, and handed Mr Pancks another Eastern pipe, the latter
gentleman was perfectly comfortable.

They puffed for a while in silence, Mr Pancks like a steam-vessel
with wind, tide, calm water, and all other sea-going conditions in her
favour. He was the first to speak, and he spoke thus:

'Yes. Investments is the word.'

Clennam, with his former look, said 'Ah!'

'I am going back to it, you see,' said Pancks.

'Yes. I see you are going back to it,' returned Clennam, wondering why.

'Wasn't it a curious thing that they should run in little Altro's head?
Eh?' said Pancks as he smoked. 'Wasn't that how you put it?'

'That was what I said.'

'Ay! But think of the whole Yard having got it. Think of their
all meeting me with it, on my collecting days, here and there and
everywhere. Whether they pay, or whether they don't pay. Merdle, Merdle,
Merdle. Always Merdle.'

'Very strange how these runs on an infatuation prevail,' said Arthur.

'An't it?' returned Pancks. After smoking for a minute or so, more drily
than comported with his recent oiling, he added: 'Because you see these
people don't understand the subject.'

'Not a bit,' assented Clennam.

'Not a bit,' cried Pancks. 'Know nothing of figures. Know nothing of
money questions. Never made a calculation. Never worked it, sir!'

'If they had--' Clennam was going on to say; when Mr Pancks, without
change of countenance, produced a sound so far surpassing all his usual
efforts, nasal or bronchial, that he stopped.

'If they had?' repeated Pancks in an inquiring tone.

'I thought you--spoke,' said Arthur, hesitating what name to give the
interruption.

'Not at all,' said Pancks. 'Not yet. I may in a minute. If they had?'

'If they had,' observed Clennam, who was a little at a loss how to take
his friend, 'why, I suppose they would have known better.'

'How so, Mr Clennam?' Pancks asked quickly, and with an odd effect of
having been from the commencement of the conversation loaded with the
heavy charge he now fired off. 'They're right, you know. They don't mean
to be, but they're right.'

'Right in sharing Cavalletto's inclination to speculate with Mr Merdle?'

'Per-fectly, sir,' said Pancks. 'I've gone into it. I've made the
calculations. I've worked it. They're safe and genuine.' Relieved by
having got to this, Mr Pancks took as long a pull as his lungs would
permit at his Eastern pipe, and looked sagaciously and steadily at
Clennam while inhaling and exhaling too.

In those moments, Mr Pancks began to give out the dangerous infection
with which he was laden. It is the manner of communicating these
diseases; it is the subtle way in which they go about.

'Do you mean, my good Pancks,' asked Clennam emphatically, 'that you
would put that thousand pounds of yours, let us say, for instance, out
at this kind of interest?'

'Certainly,' said Pancks. 'Already done it, sir.'

Mr Pancks took another long inhalation, another long exhalation, another
long sagacious look at Clennam.

'I tell you, Mr Clennam, I've gone into it,' said Pancks. 'He's a man of
immense resources--enormous capital--government influence. They're the
best schemes afloat. They're safe. They're certain.'

'Well!' returned Clennam, looking first at him gravely and then at the
fire gravely. 'You surprise me!'

'Bah!' Pancks retorted. 'Don't say that, sir. It's what you ought to do
yourself! Why don't you do as I do?'

Of whom Mr Pancks had taken the prevalent disease, he could no more have
told than if he had unconsciously taken a fever. Bred at first, as many
physical diseases are, in the wickedness of men, and then disseminated
in their ignorance, these epidemics, after a period, get communicated to
many sufferers who are neither ignorant nor wicked. Mr Pancks might, or
might not, have caught the illness himself from a subject of this class;
but in this category he appeared before Clennam, and the infection he
threw off was all the more virulent.

'And you have really invested,' Clennam had already passed to that word,
'your thousand pounds, Pancks?'

'To be sure, sir!' replied Pancks boldly, with a puff of smoke. 'And
only wish it ten!'

Now, Clennam had two subjects lying heavy on his lonely mind that night;
the one, his partner's long-deferred hope; the other, what he had seen
and heard at his mother's. In the relief of having this companion,
and of feeling that he could trust him, he passed on to both, and both
brought him round again, with an increase and acceleration of force, to
his point of departure.

It came about in the simplest manner. Quitting the investment subject,
after an interval of silent looking at the fire through the smoke of his
pipe, he told Pancks how and why he was occupied with the great National
Department. 'A hard case it has been, and a hard case it is on Doyce,'
he finished by saying, with all the honest feeling the topic roused in
him.

'Hard indeed,' Pancks acquiesced. 'But you manage for him, Mr Clennam?'

'How do you mean?'

'Manage the money part of the business?'

'Yes. As well as I can.'

'Manage it better, sir,' said Pancks. 'Recompense him for his toils and
disappointments. Give him the chances of the time. He'll never benefit
himself in that way, patient and preoccupied workman. He looks to you,
sir.'

'I do my best, Pancks,' returned Clennam, uneasily. 'As to duly weighing
and considering these new enterprises of which I have had no experience,
I doubt if I am fit for it, I am growing old.'

'Growing old?' cried Pancks. 'Ha, ha!'

There was something so indubitably genuine in the wonderful laugh, and
series of snorts and puffs, engendered in Mr Pancks's astonishment at,
and utter rejection of, the idea, that his being quite in earnest could
not be questioned.

'Growing old?' cried Pancks. 'Hear, hear, hear! Old? Hear him, hear
him!'

The positive refusal expressed in Mr Pancks's continued snorts, no less
than in these exclamations, to entertain the sentiment for a single
instant, drove Arthur away from it. Indeed, he was fearful of something
happening to Mr Pancks in the violent conflict that took place between
the breath he jerked out of himself and the smoke he jerked into
himself. This abandonment of the second topic threw him on the third.

'Young, old, or middle-aged, Pancks,' he said, when there was a
favourable pause, 'I am in a very anxious and uncertain state; a state
that even leads me to doubt whether anything now seeming to belong to
me, may be really mine. Shall I tell you how this is? Shall I put a
great trust in you?'

'You shall, sir,' said Pancks, 'if you believe me worthy of it.'

'I do.'

'You may!' Mr Pancks's short and sharp rejoinder, confirmed by the
sudden outstretching of his coaly hand, was most expressive and
convincing. Arthur shook the hand warmly.

He then, softening the nature of his old apprehensions as much as was
possible consistently with their being made intelligible and never
alluding to his mother by name, but speaking vaguely of a relation
of his, confided to Mr Pancks a broad outline of the misgivings he
entertained, and of the interview he had witnessed. Mr Pancks listened
with such interest that, regardless of the charms of the Eastern pipe,
he put it in the grate among the fire-irons, and occupied his hands
during the whole recital in so erecting the loops and hooks of hair
all over his head, that he looked, when it came to a conclusion, like a
journeyman Hamlet in conversation with his father's spirit.

'Brings me back, sir,' was his exclamation then, with a startling touch
on Clennam's knee, 'brings me back, sir, to the Investments! I don't
say anything of your making yourself poor to repair a wrong you never
committed. That's you. A man must be himself. But I say this,
fearing you may want money to save your own blood from exposure and
disgrace--make as much as you can!'

Arthur shook his head, but looked at him thoughtfully too.

'Be as rich as you can, sir,' Pancks adjured him with a powerful
concentration of all his energies on the advice. 'Be as rich as you
honestly can. It's your duty. Not for your sake, but for the sake of
others. Take time by the forelock. Poor Mr Doyce (who really _is_ growing
old) depends upon you. Your relative depends upon you. You don't know
what depends upon you.'

'Well, well, well!' returned Arthur. 'Enough for to-night.'

'One word more, Mr Clennam,' retorted Pancks, 'and then enough for
to-night. Why should you leave all the gains to the gluttons, knaves,
and impostors? Why should you leave all the gains that are to be got to
my proprietor and the like of him? Yet you're always doing it. When I
say you, I mean such men as you. You know you are. Why, I see it
every day of my life. I see nothing else. It's my business to see it.
Therefore I say,' urged Pancks, 'Go in and win!'

'But what of Go in and lose?' said Arthur.

'Can't be done, sir,' returned Pancks. 'I have looked into it. Name up
everywhere--immense resources--enormous capital--great position--high
connection--government influence. Can't be done!'

Gradually, after this closing exposition, Mr Pancks subsided; allowed
his hair to droop as much as it ever would droop on the utmost
persuasion; reclaimed the pipe from the fire-irons, filled it anew, and
smoked it out. They said little more; but were company to one another in
silently pursuing the same subjects, and did not part until midnight.
On taking his leave, Mr Pancks, when he had shaken hands with Clennam,
worked completely round him before he steamed out at the door. This,
Arthur received as an assurance that he might implicitly rely on Pancks,
if he ever should come to need assistance; either in any of the matters
of which they had spoken that night, or any other subject that could in
any way affect himself.

At intervals all next day, and even while his attention was fixed on
other things, he thought of Mr Pancks's investment of his thousand
pounds, and of his having 'looked into it.' He thought of Mr Pancks's
being so sanguine in this matter, and of his not being usually of a
sanguine character. He thought of the great National Department, and of
the delight it would be to him to see Doyce better off. He thought
of the darkly threatening place that went by the name of Home in his
remembrance, and of the gathering shadows which made it yet more darkly
threatening than of old. He observed anew that wherever he went, he
saw, or heard, or touched, the celebrated name of Merdle; he found it
difficult even to remain at his desk a couple of hours, without having
it presented to one of his bodily senses through some agency or other.
He began to think it was curious too that it should be everywhere, and
that nobody but he should seem to have any mistrust of it. Though indeed
he began to remember, when he got to this, even _he_ did not mistrust it;
he had only happened to keep aloof from it.

Such symptoms, when a disease of the kind is rife, are usually the signs
of sickening.




CHAPTER 14. Taking Advice


When it became known to the Britons on the shore of the yellow Tiber
that their intelligent compatriot, Mr Sparkler, was made one of the
Lords of their Circumlocution Office, they took it as a piece of news
with which they had no nearer concern than with any other piece of
news--any other Accident or Offence--in the English papers. Some
laughed; some said, by way of complete excuse, that the post was
virtually a sinecure, and any fool who could spell his name was good
enough for it; some, and these the more solemn political oracles,
said that Decimus did wisely to strengthen himself, and that the sole
constitutional purpose of all places within the gift of Decimus, was,
that Decimus _should_ strengthen himself. A few bilious Britons there were
who would not subscribe to this article of faith; but their objection
was purely theoretical. In a practical point of view, they listlessly
abandoned the matter, as being the business of some other Britons
unknown, somewhere, or nowhere. In like manner, at home, great numbers
of Britons maintained, for as long as four-and-twenty consecutive hours,
that those invisible and anonymous Britons 'ought to take it up;' and
that if they quietly acquiesced in it, they deserved it. But of what
class the remiss Britons were composed, and where the unlucky creatures
hid themselves, and why they hid themselves, and how it constantly
