aware that Fanny was more showy in manner than the occasion appeared to
require, and, looking about for the cause through the window and through
the open door, saw another gondola evidently in waiting on them.

As this gondola attended their progress in various artful ways;
sometimes shooting on a-head, and stopping to let them pass; sometimes,
when the way was broad enough, skimming along side by side with them;
and sometimes following close astern; and as Fanny gradually made no
disguise that she was playing off graces upon somebody within it, of
whom she at the same time feigned to be unconscious; Little Dorrit at
length asked who it was?

To which Fanny made the short answer, 'That gaby.'

'Who?' said Little Dorrit.

'My dear child,' returned Fanny (in a tone suggesting that before her
Uncle's protest she might have said, You little fool, instead), 'how
slow you are! Young Sparkler.'

She lowered the window on her side, and, leaning back and resting her
elbow on it negligently, fanned herself with a rich Spanish fan of black
and gold. The attendant gondola, having skimmed forward again, with some
swift trace of an eye in the window, Fanny laughed coquettishly and
said, 'Did you ever see such a fool, my love?'

'Do you think he means to follow you all the way?' asked Little Dorrit.

'My precious child,' returned Fanny, 'I can't possibly answer for what
an idiot in a state of desperation may do, but I should think it highly
probable. It's not such an enormous distance. All Venice would scarcely
be that, I imagine, if he's dying for a glimpse of me.'

'And is he?' asked Little Dorrit in perfect simplicity.

'Well, my love, that really is an awkward question for me to answer,'
said her sister. 'I believe he is. You had better ask Edward. He tells
Edward he is, I believe. I understand he makes a perfect spectacle of
himself at the Casino, and that sort of places, by going on about me.
But you had better ask Edward if you want to know.'

'I wonder he doesn't call,' said Little Dorrit after thinking a moment.

'My dear Amy, your wonder will soon cease, if I am rightly informed.
I should not be at all surprised if he called to-day. The creature has
only been waiting to get his courage up, I suspect.'

'Will you see him?'

'Indeed, my darling,' said Fanny, 'that's just as it may happen. Here he
is again. Look at him. O, you simpleton!'

Mr Sparkler had, undeniably, a weak appearance; with his eye in the
window like a knot in the glass, and no reason on earth for stopping his
bark suddenly, except the real reason.

'When you asked me if I will see him, my dear,' said Fanny, almost as
well composed in the graceful indifference of her attitude as Mrs Merdle
herself, 'what do you mean?'

'I mean,' said Little Dorrit--'I think I rather mean what do you mean,
dear Fanny?'

Fanny laughed again, in a manner at once condescending, arch, and
affable; and said, putting her arm round her sister in a playfully
affectionate way:

'Now tell me, my little pet. When we saw that woman at Martigny, how
did you think she carried it off? Did you see what she decided on in a
moment?'

'No, Fanny.'

'Then I'll tell you, Amy. She settled with herself, now I'll never
refer to that meeting under such different circumstances, and I'll never
pretend to have any idea that these are the same girls. That's _her_ way
out of a difficulty. What did I tell you when we came away from Harley
Street that time? She is as insolent and false as any woman in the
world. But in the first capacity, my love, she may find people who can
match her.'

A significant turn of the Spanish fan towards Fanny's bosom, indicated
with great expression where one of these people was to be found.

'Not only that,' pursued Fanny, 'but she gives the same charge to
Young Sparkler; and doesn't let him come after me until she has got it
thoroughly into his most ridiculous of all ridiculous noddles (for one
really can't call it a head), that he is to pretend to have been first
struck with me in that Inn Yard.'

'Why?' asked Little Dorrit.

'Why? Good gracious, my love!' (again very much in the tone of You
stupid little creature) 'how can you ask? Don't you see that I may have
become a rather desirable match for a noddle? And don't you see that she
puts the deception upon us, and makes a pretence, while she shifts it
from her own shoulders (very good shoulders they are too, I must say),'
observed Miss Fanny, glancing complacently at herself, 'of considering
our feelings?'

'But we can always go back to the plain truth.'

'Yes, but if you please we won't,' retorted Fanny. 'No; I am not going
to have that done, Amy. The pretext is none of mine; it's hers, and she
shall have enough of it.'

In the triumphant exaltation of her feelings, Miss Fanny, using her
Spanish fan with one hand, squeezed her sister's waist with the other,
as if she were crushing Mrs Merdle.

'No,' repeated Fanny. 'She shall find me go her way. She took it, and
I'll follow it. And, with the blessing of fate and fortune, I'll go on
improving that woman's acquaintance until I have given her maid,
before her eyes, things from my dressmaker's ten times as handsome and
expensive as she once gave me from hers!'

Little Dorrit was silent; sensible that she was not to be heard on
any question affecting the family dignity, and unwilling to lose to no
purpose her sister's newly and unexpectedly restored favour. She could
not concur, but she was silent. Fanny well knew what she was thinking
of; so well, that she soon asked her.

Her reply was, 'Do you mean to encourage Mr Sparkler, Fanny?'

'Encourage him, my dear?' said her sister, smiling contemptuously, 'that
depends upon what you call encourage. No, I don't mean to encourage him.
But I'll make a slave of him.'

Little Dorrit glanced seriously and doubtfully in her face, but Fanny
was not to be so brought to a check. She furled her fan of black and
gold, and used it to tap her sister's nose; with the air of a proud
beauty and a great spirit, who toyed with and playfully instructed a
homely companion.

'I shall make him fetch and carry, my dear, and I shall make him subject
to me. And if I don't make his mother subject to me, too, it shall not
be my fault.'

'Do you think--dear Fanny, don't be offended, we are so comfortable
together now--that you can quite see the end of that course?'

'I can't say I have so much as looked for it yet, my dear,' answered
Fanny, with supreme indifference; 'all in good time. Such are my
intentions. And really they have taken me so long to develop, that here
we are at home. And Young Sparkler at the door, inquiring who is within.
By the merest accident, of course!'

In effect, the swain was standing up in his gondola, card-case in
hand, affecting to put the question to a servant. This conjunction
of circumstances led to his immediately afterwards presenting himself
before the young ladies in a posture, which in ancient times would not
have been considered one of favourable augury for his suit; since the
gondoliers of the young ladies, having been put to some inconvenience
by the chase, so neatly brought their own boat in the gentlest collision
with the bark of Mr Sparkler, as to tip that gentleman over like a
larger species of ninepin, and cause him to exhibit the soles of his
shoes to the object of his dearest wishes: while the nobler portions of
his anatomy struggled at the bottom of his boat in the arms of one of
his men.

However, as Miss Fanny called out with much concern, Was the gentleman
hurt, Mr Sparkler rose more restored than might have been expected, and
stammered for himself with blushes, 'Not at all so.' Miss Fanny had no
recollection of having ever seen him before, and was passing on, with a
distant inclination of her head, when he announced himself by name. Even
then she was in a difficulty from being unable to call it to mind, until
he explained that he had had the honour of seeing her at Martigny. Then
she remembered him, and hoped his lady-mother was well.

'Thank you,' stammered Mr Sparkler, 'she's uncommonly well--at least,
poorly.'

'In Venice?' said Miss Fanny.

'In Rome,' Mr Sparkler answered. 'I am here by myself, myself. I came to
call upon Mr Edward Dorrit myself. Indeed, upon Mr Dorrit likewise. In
fact, upon the family.'

Turning graciously to the attendants, Miss Fanny inquired whether her
papa or brother was within? The reply being that they were both within,
Mr Sparkler humbly offered his arm. Miss Fanny accepting it, was squired
up the great staircase by Mr Sparkler, who, if he still believed (which
there is not any reason to doubt) that she had no nonsense about her,
rather deceived himself.

Arrived in a mouldering reception-room, where the faded hangings, of a
sad sea-green, had worn and withered until they looked as if they
might have claimed kindred with the waifs of seaweed drifting under
the windows, or clinging to the walls and weeping for their imprisoned
relations, Miss Fanny despatched emissaries for her father and brother.
Pending whose appearance, she showed to great advantage on a sofa,
completing Mr Sparkler's conquest with some remarks upon Dante--known
to that gentleman as an eccentric man in the nature of an Old File,
who used to put leaves round his head, and sit upon a stool for some
unaccountable purpose, outside the cathedral at Florence.

Mr Dorrit welcomed the visitor with the highest urbanity, and most
courtly manners. He inquired particularly after Mrs Merdle. He inquired
particularly after Mr Merdle. Mr Sparkler said, or rather twitched out
of himself in small pieces by the shirt-collar, that Mrs Merdle having
completely used up her place in the country, and also her house at
Brighton, and being, of course, unable, don't you see, to remain in
London when there wasn't a soul there, and not feeling herself this year
quite up to visiting about at people's places, had resolved to have
a touch at Rome, where a woman like herself, with a proverbially fine
appearance, and with no nonsense about her, couldn't fail to be a great
acquisition. As to Mr Merdle, he was so much wanted by the men in the
City and the rest of those places, and was such a doosed extraordinary
phenomenon in Buying and Banking and that, that Mr Sparkler doubted if
the monetary system of the country would be able to spare him; though
that his work was occasionally one too many for him, and that he would
be all the better for a temporary shy at an entirely new scene and
climate, Mr Sparkler did not conceal. As to himself, Mr Sparkler
conveyed to the Dorrit family that he was going, on rather particular
business, wherever they were going.

This immense conversational achievement required time, but was effected.
Being effected, Mr Dorrit expressed his hope that Mr Sparkler would
shortly dine with them. Mr Sparkler received the idea so kindly that Mr
Dorrit asked what he was going to do that day, for instance? As he was
going to do nothing that day (his usual occupation, and one for which he
was particularly qualified), he was secured without postponement; being
further bound over to accompany the ladies to the Opera in the evening.

At dinner-time Mr Sparkler rose out of the sea, like Venus's son taking
after his mother, and made a splendid appearance ascending the great
staircase. If Fanny had been charming in the morning, she was now thrice
charming, very becomingly dressed in her most suitable colours, and with
an air of negligence upon her that doubled Mr Sparkler's fetters, and
riveted them.

'I hear you are acquainted, Mr Sparkler,' said his host at dinner,
'with--ha--Mr Gowan. Mr Henry Gowan?'

'Perfectly, sir,' returned Mr Sparkler. 'His mother and my mother are
cronies in fact.'

'If I had thought of it, Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, with a patronage as
magnificent as that of Lord Decimus himself, 'you should have despatched
a note to them, asking them to dine to-day. Some of our people could
have--ha--fetched them, and taken them home. We could have spared
a--hum--gondola for that purpose. I am sorry to have forgotten this.
Pray remind me of them to-morrow.'

Little Dorrit was not without doubts how Mr Henry Gowan might take their
patronage; but she promised not to fail in the reminder.

'Pray, does Mr Henry Gowan paint--ha--Portraits?' inquired Mr Dorrit.

Mr Sparkler opined that he painted anything, if he could get the job.

'He has no particular walk?' said Mr Dorrit.

Mr Sparkler, stimulated by Love to brilliancy, replied that for a
particular walk a man ought to have a particular pair of shoes; as, for
example, shooting, shooting-shoes; cricket, cricket-shoes. Whereas, he
believed that Henry Gowan had no particular pair of shoes.

'No speciality?' said Mr Dorrit.

This being a very long word for Mr Sparkler, and his mind being
exhausted by his late effort, he replied, 'No, thank you. I seldom take
it.'

'Well!' said Mr Dorrit. 'It would be very agreeable to me to present
a gentleman so connected, with some--ha--Testimonial of my desire to
further his interests, and develop the--hum--germs of his genius. I
think I must engage Mr Gowan to paint my picture. If the result should
be--ha--mutually satisfactory, I might afterwards engage him to try his
hand upon my family.'

The exquisitely bold and original thought presented itself to Mr
Sparkler, that there was an opening here for saying there were some of
the family (emphasising 'some' in a marked manner) to whom no painter
could render justice. But, for want of a form of words in which to
express the idea, it returned to the skies.

This was the more to be regretted as Miss Fanny greatly applauded the
notion of the portrait, and urged her papa to act upon it. She surmised,
she said, that Mr Gowan had lost better and higher opportunities by
marrying his pretty wife; and Love in a cottage, painting pictures for
dinner, was so delightfully interesting, that she begged her papa to
give him the commission whether he could paint a likeness or not: though
indeed both she and Amy knew he could, from having seen a speaking
likeness on his easel that day, and having had the opportunity of
comparing it with the original. These remarks made Mr Sparkler (as
perhaps they were intended to do) nearly distracted; for while on
the one hand they expressed Miss Fanny's susceptibility of the tender
passion, she herself showed such an innocent unconsciousness of his
admiration that his eyes goggled in his head with jealousy of an unknown
rival.

Descending into the sea again after dinner, and ascending out of it
at the Opera staircase, preceded by one of their gondoliers, like an
attendant Merman, with a great linen lantern, they entered their box,
and Mr Sparkler entered on an evening of agony. The theatre being
dark, and the box light, several visitors lounged in during the
representation; in whom Fanny was so interested, and in conversation
with whom she fell into such charming attitudes, as she had little
confidences with them, and little disputes concerning the identity of
people in distant boxes, that the wretched Sparkler hated all mankind.
But he had two consolations at the close of the performance. She gave
him her fan to hold while she adjusted her cloak, and it was his
blessed privilege to give her his arm down-stairs again. These crumbs of
encouragement, Mr Sparkler thought, would just keep him going; and it is
not impossible that Miss Dorrit thought so too.

The Merman with his light was ready at the box-door, and other Mermen
with other lights were ready at many of the doors. The Dorrit Merman
held his lantern low, to show the steps, and Mr Sparkler put on another
heavy set of fetters over his former set, as he watched her radiant
feet twinkling down the stairs beside him. Among the loiterers here, was
Blandois of Paris. He spoke, and moved forward beside Fanny.

Little Dorrit was in front with her brother and Mrs General (Mr Dorrit
had remained at home), but on the brink of the quay they all came
together. She started again to find Blandois close to her, handing Fanny
into the boat.

'Gowan has had a loss,' he said, 'since he was made happy to-day by a
visit from fair ladies.'

'A loss?' repeated Fanny, relinquished by the bereaved Sparkler, and
taking her seat.

'A loss,' said Blandois. 'His dog Lion.'

Little Dorrit's hand was in his, as he spoke.


'He is dead,' said Blandois.

'Dead?' echoed Little Dorrit. 'That noble dog?'

'Faith, dear ladies!' said Blandois, smiling and shrugging his
shoulders, 'somebody has poisoned that noble dog. He is as dead as the
Doges!'




CHAPTER 7. Mostly, Prunes and Prism


Mrs General, always on her coach-box keeping the proprieties well
together, took pains to form a surface on her very dear young friend,
and Mrs General's very dear young friend tried hard to receive it. Hard
as she had tried in her laborious life to attain many ends, she had
never tried harder than she did now, to be varnished by Mrs General. It
made her anxious and ill at ease to be operated upon by that smoothing
hand, it is true; but she submitted herself to the family want in
its greatness as she had submitted herself to the family want in its
littleness, and yielded to her own inclinations in this thing no more
than she had yielded to her hunger itself, in the days when she had
saved her dinner that her father might have his supper.

One comfort that she had under the Ordeal by General was more
sustaining to her, and made her more grateful than to a less devoted
and affectionate spirit, not habituated to her struggles and sacrifices,
might appear quite reasonable; and, indeed, it may often be observed in
life, that spirits like Little Dorrit do not appear to reason half
as carefully as the folks who get the better of them. The continued
kindness of her sister was this comfort to Little Dorrit. It was nothing
to her that the kindness took the form of tolerant patronage; she was
used to that. It was nothing to her that it kept her in a tributary
position, and showed her in attendance on the flaming car in which Miss
Fanny sat on an elevated seat, exacting homage; she sought no better
place. Always admiring Fanny's beauty, and grace, and readiness, and not
now asking herself how much of her disposition to be strongly attached
to Fanny was due to her own heart, and how much to Fanny's, she gave her
all the sisterly fondness her great heart contained.

The wholesale amount of Prunes and Prism which Mrs General infused into
the family life, combined with the perpetual plunges made by Fanny into
society, left but a very small residue of any natural deposit at the
bottom of the mixture. This rendered confidences with Fanny doubly
precious to Little Dorrit, and heightened the relief they afforded her.

'Amy,' said Fanny to her one night when they were alone, after a day so
tiring that Little Dorrit was quite worn out, though Fanny would have
taken another dip into society with the greatest pleasure in life, 'I
am going to put something into your little head. You won't guess what it
is, I suspect.'

'I don't think that's likely, dear,' said Little Dorrit.

'Come, I'll give you a clue, child,' said Fanny. 'Mrs General.'

Prunes and Prism, in a thousand combinations, having been wearily in the
ascendant all day--everything having been surface and varnish and show
without substance--Little Dorrit looked as if she had hoped that Mrs
General was safely tucked up in bed for some hours.

'_Now_, can you guess, Amy?' said Fanny.

'No, dear. Unless I have done anything,' said Little Dorrit, rather
alarmed, and meaning anything calculated to crack varnish and ruffle
surface.

Fanny was so very much amused by the misgiving, that she took up her
favourite fan (being then seated at her dressing-table with her armoury
of cruel instruments about her, most of them reeking from the heart
of Sparkler), and tapped her sister frequently on the nose with it,
laughing all the time.

'Oh, our Amy, our Amy!' said Fanny. 'What a timid little goose our Amy
is! But this is nothing to laugh at. On the contrary, I am very cross,
my dear.'

'As it is not with me, Fanny, I don't mind,' returned her sister,
smiling.

'Ah! But I do mind,' said Fanny, 'and so will you, Pet, when I enlighten
you. Amy, has it never struck you that somebody is monstrously polite to
Mrs General?'

'Everybody is polite to Mrs General,' said Little Dorrit. 'Because--'

'Because she freezes them into it?' interrupted Fanny. 'I don't mean
that; quite different from that. Come! Has it never struck you, Amy,
that Pa is monstrously polite to Mrs General.'

Amy, murmuring 'No,' looked quite confounded.

'No; I dare say not. But he is,' said Fanny. 'He is, Amy. And remember
my words. Mrs General has designs on Pa!'

'Dear Fanny, do you think it possible that Mrs General has designs on
any one?'

'Do I think it possible?' retorted Fanny. 'My love, I know it. I tell
you she has designs on Pa. And more than that, I tell you Pa considers
her such a wonder, such a paragon of accomplishment, and such an
acquisition to our family, that he is ready to get himself into a state
of perfect infatuation with her at any moment. And that opens a pretty
picture of things, I hope? Think of me with Mrs General for a Mama!'

Little Dorrit did not reply, 'Think of me with Mrs General for a Mama;'
but she looked anxious, and seriously inquired what had led Fanny to
these conclusions.

'Lord, my darling,' said Fanny, tartly. 'You might as well ask me how
I know when a man is struck with myself! But, of course I do know. It
happens pretty often: but I always know it. I know this in much the same
way, I suppose. At all events, I know it.'

'You never heard Papa say anything?'

'Say anything?' repeated Fanny. 'My dearest, darling child, what
necessity has he had, yet awhile, to say anything?'

'And you have never heard Mrs General say anything?'

'My goodness me, Amy,' returned Fanny, 'is she the sort of woman to say
anything? Isn't it perfectly plain and clear that she has nothing to do
at present but to hold herself upright, keep her aggravating gloves on,
and go sweeping about? Say anything! If she had the ace of trumps in her
hand at whist, she wouldn't say anything, child. It would come out when
she played it.'

'At least, you may be mistaken, Fanny. Now, may you not?'

'O yes, I _may_ be,' said Fanny, 'but I am not. However, I am glad you
can contemplate such an escape, my dear, and I am glad that you can take
this for the present with sufficient coolness to think of such a chance.
It makes me hope that you may be able to bear the connection. I should
not be able to bear it, and I should not try. I'd marry young Sparkler
first.'

'O, you would never marry him, Fanny, under any circumstances.'

'Upon my word, my dear,' rejoined that young lady with exceeding
indifference, 'I wouldn't positively answer even for that. There's
no knowing what might happen. Especially as I should have many
opportunities, afterwards, of treating that woman, his mother, in her
own style. Which I most decidedly should not be slow to avail myself of,
Amy.'

No more passed between the sisters then; but what had passed gave the
two subjects of Mrs General and Mr Sparkler great prominence in Little
Dorrit's mind, and thenceforth she thought very much of both.

Mrs General, having long ago formed her own surface to such perfection
that it hid whatever was below it (if anything), no observation was to
be made in that quarter. Mr Dorrit was undeniably very polite to her
and had a high opinion of her; but Fanny, impetuous at most times, might
easily be wrong for all that. Whereas, the Sparkler question was on the
different footing that any one could see what was going on there, and
Little Dorrit saw it and pondered on it with many doubts and wonderings.

The devotion of Mr Sparkler was only to be equalled by the caprice
and cruelty of his enslaver. Sometimes she would prefer him to such
distinction of notice, that he would chuckle aloud with joy; next day,
or next hour, she would overlook him so completely, and drop him into
such an abyss of obscurity, that he would groan under a weak pretence of
coughing. The constancy of his attendance never touched Fanny: though he
was so inseparable from Edward, that, when that gentleman wished for
a change of society, he was under the irksome necessity of gliding out
like a conspirator in disguised boats and by secret doors and back ways;
though he was so solicitous to know how Mr Dorrit was, that he called
every other day to inquire, as if Mr Dorrit were the prey of an
intermittent fever; though he was so constantly being paddled up and
down before the principal windows, that he might have been supposed to
have made a wager for a large stake to be paddled a thousand miles in
a thousand hours; though whenever the gondola of his mistress left the
gate, the gondola of Mr Sparkler shot out from some watery ambush
and gave chase, as if she were a fair smuggler and he a custom-house
officer. It was probably owing to this fortification of the natural
strength of his constitution with so much exposure to the air, and the
salt sea, that Mr Sparkler did not pine outwardly; but, whatever the
cause, he was so far from having any prospect of moving his mistress by
a languishing state of health, that he grew bluffer every day, and that
peculiarity in his appearance of seeming rather a swelled boy than
a young man, became developed to an extraordinary degree of ruddy
puffiness.

Blandois calling to pay his respects, Mr Dorrit received him with
affability as the friend of Mr Gowan, and mentioned to him his idea of
commissioning Mr Gowan to transmit him to posterity. Blandois highly
extolling it, it occurred to Mr Dorrit that it might be agreeable to
Blandois to communicate to his friend the great opportunity reserved
for him. Blandois accepted the commission with his own free elegance of
manner, and swore he would discharge it before he was an hour older. On
his imparting the news to Gowan, that Master gave Mr Dorrit to the
Devil with great liberality some round dozen of times (for he resented
patronage almost as much as he resented the want of it), and was
inclined to quarrel with his friend for bringing him the message.

'It may be a defect in my mental vision, Blandois,' said he, 'but may I
die if I see what you have to do with this.'

'Death of my life,' replied Blandois, 'nor I neither, except that I
thought I was serving my friend.'

'By putting an upstart's hire in his pocket?' said Gowan, frowning.
'Do you mean that? Tell your other friend to get his head painted for
the sign of some public-house, and to get it done by a sign-painter. Who
am I, and who is he?'

'Professore,' returned the ambassador, 'and who is Blandois?'

Without appearing at all interested in the latter question, Gowan
angrily whistled Mr Dorrit away. But, next day, he resumed the subject
by saying in his off-hand manner and with a slighting laugh, 'Well,
Blandois, when shall we go to this Maecenas of yours? We journeymen must
take jobs when we can get them. When shall we go and look after this
job?'

'When you will,' said the injured Blandois, 'as you please. What have I
to do with it? What is it to me?'

'I can tell you what it is to me,' said Gowan. 'Bread and cheese. One
must eat! So come along, my Blandois.'

Mr Dorrit received them in the presence of his daughters and of Mr
Sparkler, who happened, by some surprising accident, to be calling
there. 'How are you, Sparkler?' said Gowan carelessly. 'When you have
to live by your mother wit, old boy, I hope you may get on better than I
do.'

Mr Dorrit then mentioned his proposal. 'Sir,' said Gowan, laughing,
after receiving it gracefully enough, 'I am new to the trade, and not
expert at its mysteries. I believe I ought to look at you in various
lights, tell you you are a capital subject, and consider when I shall be
sufficiently disengaged to devote myself with the necessary enthusiasm
to the fine picture I mean to make of you. I assure you,' and he laughed
again, 'I feel quite a traitor in the camp of those dear, gifted, good,
noble fellows, my brother artists, by not doing the hocus-pocus better.
But I have not been brought up to it, and it's too late to learn it.
Now, the fact is, I am a very bad painter, but not much worse than the
generality. If you are going to throw away a hundred guineas or so, I
am as poor as a poor relation of great people usually is, and I shall be
very much obliged to you, if you'll throw them away upon me. I'll do the
best I can for the money; and if the best should be bad, why even then,
you may probably have a bad picture with a small name to it, instead of
a bad picture with a large name to it.'

This tone, though not what he had expected, on the whole suited Mr
Dorrit remarkably well. It showed that the gentleman, highly connected,
and not a mere workman, would be under an obligation to him. He
expressed his satisfaction in placing himself in Mr Gowan's hands, and
trusted that he would have the pleasure, in their characters of private
gentlemen, of improving his acquaintance.

'You are very good,' said Gowan. 'I have not forsworn society since I
joined the brotherhood of the brush (the most delightful fellows on the
face of the earth), and am glad enough to smell the old fine gunpowder
now and then, though it did blow me into mid-air and my present calling.
You'll not think, Mr Dorrit,' and here he laughed again in the easiest
way, 'that I am lapsing into the freemasonry of the craft--for it's not
so; upon my life I can't help betraying it wherever I go, though, by
Jupiter, I love and honour the craft with all my might--if I propose a
stipulation as to time and place?'

Ha! Mr Dorrit could erect no--hum--suspicion of that kind on Mr Gowan's
frankness.

'Again you are very good,' said Gowan. 'Mr Dorrit, I hear you are going
to Rome. I am going to Rome, having friends there. Let me begin to do
you the injustice I have conspired to do you, there--not here. We shall
all be hurried during the rest of our stay here; and though there's not
a poorer man with whole elbows in Venice, than myself, I have not quite
got all the Amateur out of me yet--comprising the trade again, you
see!--and can't fall on to order, in a hurry, for the mere sake of the
sixpences.'

These remarks were not less favourably received by Mr Dorrit than their
predecessors. They were the prelude to the first reception of Mr and Mrs
Gowan at dinner, and they skilfully placed Gowan on his usual ground in
the new family.

His wife, too, they placed on her usual ground. Miss Fanny understood,
with particular distinctness, that Mrs Gowan's good looks had cost her
husband very dear; that there had been a great disturbance about her
in the Barnacle family; and that the Dowager Mrs Gowan, nearly
heart-broken, had resolutely set her face against the marriage until
overpowered by her maternal feelings. Mrs General likewise clearly
understood that the attachment had occasioned much family grief and
dissension. Of honest Mr Meagles no mention was made; except that it
was natural enough that a person of that sort should wish to raise his
daughter out of his own obscurity, and that no one could blame him for
trying his best to do so.

Little Dorrit's interest in the fair subject of this easily accepted
belief was too earnest and watchful to fail in accurate observation. She
could see that it had its part in throwing upon Mrs Gowan the touch of a
shadow under which she lived, and she even had an instinctive knowledge
that there was not the least truth in it. But it had an influence in
placing obstacles in the way of her association with Mrs Gowan by making
the Prunes and Prism school excessively polite to her, but not very
intimate with her; and Little Dorrit, as an enforced sizar of that
college, was obliged to submit herself humbly to its ordinances.

Nevertheless, there was a sympathetic understanding already
established between the two, which would have carried them over
greater difficulties, and made a friendship out of a more restricted
intercourse. As though accidents were determined to be favourable to
it, they had a new assurance of congeniality in the aversion which each
perceived that the other felt towards Blandois of Paris; an aversion
amounting to the repugnance and horror of a natural antipathy towards an
odious creature of the reptile kind.

And there was a passive congeniality between them, besides this active
one. To both of them, Blandois behaved in exactly the same manner; and
to both of them his manner had uniformly something in it, which
they both knew to be different from his bearing towards others. The
difference was too minute in its expression to be perceived by others,
but they knew it to be there. A mere trick of his evil eyes, a mere turn
of his smooth white hand, a mere hair's-breadth of addition to the fall
of his nose and the rise of the moustache in the most frequent movement
of his face, conveyed to both of them, equally, a swagger personal to
themselves. It was as if he had said, 'I have a secret power in this
quarter. I know what I know.'

This had never been felt by them both in so great a degree, and never
by each so perfectly to the knowledge of the other, as on a day when he
came to Mr Dorrit's to take his leave before quitting Venice. Mrs
Gowan was herself there for the same purpose, and he came upon the
two together; the rest of the family being out. The two had not been
together five minutes, and the peculiar manner seemed to convey to them,
'You were going to talk about me. Ha! Behold me here to prevent it!'

'Gowan is coming here?' said Blandois, with a smile.

Mrs Gowan replied he was not coming.

'Not coming!' said Blandois. 'Permit your devoted servant, when you
leave here, to escort you home.'

'Thank you: I am not going home.'

'Not going home!' said Blandois. 'Then I am forlorn.'

That he might be; but he was not so forlorn as to roam away and leave
them together. He sat entertaining them with his finest compliments, and
his choicest conversation; but he conveyed to them, all the time, 'No,
no, no, dear ladies. Behold me here expressly to prevent it!'

He conveyed it to them with so much meaning, and he had such a
diabolical persistency in him, that at length, Mrs Gowan rose to depart.
On his offering his hand to Mrs Gowan to lead her down the staircase,
she retained Little Dorrit's hand in hers, with a cautious pressure, and
said, 'No, thank you. But, if you will please to see if my boatman is
there, I shall be obliged to you.'

It left him no choice but to go down before them. As he did so, hat in
hand, Mrs Gowan whispered:

'He killed the dog.'

'Does Mr Gowan know it?' Little Dorrit whispered.

'No one knows it. Don't look towards me; look towards him. He will turn
his face in a moment. No one knows it, but I am sure he did. You are?'

'I--I think so,' Little Dorrit answered.

'Henry likes him, and he will not think ill of him; he is so generous
and open himself. But you and I feel sure that we think of him as he
deserves. He argued with Henry that the dog had been already poisoned
when he changed so, and sprang at him. Henry believes it, but we do not.
I see he is listening, but can't hear. Good-bye, my love! Good-bye!'

The last words were spoken aloud, as the vigilant Blandois stopped,
turned his head, and looked at them from the bottom of the staircase.
Assuredly he did look then, though he looked his politest, as if any
real philanthropist could have desired no better employment than to lash
a great stone to his neck, and drop him into the water flowing beyond
the dark arched gateway in which he stood. No such benefactor to mankind
being on the spot, he handed Mrs Gowan to her boat, and stood there
until it had shot out of the narrow view; when he handed himself into
his own boat and followed.

Little Dorrit had sometimes thought, and now thought again as she
retraced her steps up the staircase, that he had made his way too easily
into her father's house. But so many and such varieties of people did
the same, through Mr Dorrit's participation in his elder daughter's
society mania, that it was hardly an exceptional case. A perfect fury
for making acquaintances on whom to impress their riches and importance,
had seized the House of Dorrit.

It appeared on the whole, to Little Dorrit herself, that this same
society in which they lived, greatly resembled a superior sort of
Marshalsea. Numbers of people seemed to come abroad, pretty much
as people had come into the prison; through debt, through idleness,
relationship, curiosity, and general unfitness for getting on at home.
They were brought into these foreign towns in the custody of couriers
and local followers, just as the debtors had been brought into the
prison. They prowled about the churches and picture-galleries, much in
the old, dreary, prison-yard manner. They were usually going away again
to-morrow or next week, and rarely knew their own minds, and seldom did
what they said they would do, or went where they said they would go: in
all this again, very like the prison debtors. They paid high for poor
accommodation, and disparaged a place while they pretended to like it:
which was exactly the Marshalsea custom. They were envied when they went
away by people left behind, feigning not to want to go: and that again
was the Marshalsea habit invariably. A certain set of words and phrases,
as much belonging to tourists as the College and the Snuggery belonged
to the jail, was always in their mouths. They had precisely the same
incapacity for settling down to anything, as the prisoners used to have;
they rather deteriorated one another, as the prisoners used to do; and
they wore untidy dresses, and fell into a slouching way of life: still,
always like the people in the Marshalsea.

The period of the family's stay at Venice came, in its course, to an
end, and they moved, with their retinue, to Rome. Through a repetition
of the former Italian scenes, growing more dirty and more haggard as
they went on, and bringing them at length to where the very air was
diseased, they passed to their destination. A fine residence had been
taken for them on the Corso, and there they took up their abode, in a
city where everything seemed to be trying to stand still for ever on
the ruins of something else--except the water, which, following eternal
laws, tumbled and rolled from its glorious multitude of fountains.

Here it seemed to Little Dorrit that a change came over the Marshalsea
spirit of their society, and that Prunes and Prism got the upper hand.
Everybody was walking about St Peter's and the Vatican on somebody
else's cork legs, and straining every visible object through somebody
else's sieve. Nobody said what anything was, but everybody said what the
Mrs Generals, Mr Eustace, or somebody else said it was. The whole body
of travellers seemed to be a collection of voluntary human sacrifices,
bound hand and foot, and delivered over to Mr Eustace and his
attendants, to have the entrails of their intellects arranged according
to the taste of that sacred priesthood. Through the rugged remains
of temples and tombs and palaces and senate halls and theatres and
amphitheatres of ancient days, hosts of tongue-tied and blindfolded
moderns were carefully feeling their way, incessantly repeating Prunes
and Prism in the endeavour to set their lips according to the received
form. Mrs General was in her pure element. Nobody had an opinion. There
was a formation of surface going on around her on an amazing scale, and
it had not a flaw of courage or honest free speech in it.

Another modification of Prunes and Prism insinuated itself on Little
Dorrit's notice very shortly after their arrival. They received an early
visit from Mrs Merdle, who led that extensive department of life in the
Eternal City that winter; and the skilful manner in which she and Fanny
fenced with one another on the occasion, almost made her quiet sister
wink, like the glittering of small-swords.

'So delighted,' said Mrs Merdle, 'to resume an acquaintance so
inauspiciously begun at Martigny.'

'At Martigny, of course,' said Fanny. 'Charmed, I am sure!'

'I understand,' said Mrs Merdle, 'from my son Edmund Sparkler, that
he has already improved that chance occasion. He has returned quite
transported with Venice.'

'Indeed?' returned the careless Fanny. 'Was he there long?'

'I might refer that question to Mr Dorrit,' said Mrs Merdle, turning the
bosom towards that gentleman; 'Edmund having been so much indebted to
him for rendering his stay agreeable.'

'Oh, pray don't speak of it,' returned Fanny. 'I believe Papa had the
pleasure of inviting Mr Sparkler twice or thrice,--but it was nothing.
We had so many people about us, and kept such open house, that if he had
that pleasure, it was less than nothing.'

'Except, my dear,' said Mr Dorrit, 'except--ha--as it afforded me
unusual gratification to--hum--show by any means, however slight and
worthless, the--ha, hum--high estimation in which, in--ha--common with
the rest of the world, I hold so distinguished and princely a character
as Mr Merdle's.'

The bosom received this tribute in its most engaging manner. 'Mr
Merdle,' observed Fanny, as a means of dismissing Mr Sparkler into the
background, 'is quite a theme of Papa's, you must know, Mrs Merdle.'

'I have been--ha--disappointed, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'to understand
from Mr Sparkler that there is no great--hum--probability of Mr Merdle's
coming abroad.'

'Why, indeed,' said Mrs Merdle, 'he is so much engaged and in such
request, that I fear not. He has not been able to get abroad for years.
You, Miss Dorrit, I believe have been almost continually abroad for a
long time.'

'Oh dear yes,' drawled Fanny, with the greatest hardihood. 'An immense
number of years.'

'So I should have inferred,' said Mrs Merdle.

'Exactly,' said Fanny.

'I trust, however,' resumed Mr Dorrit, 'that if I have not
the--hum--great advantage of becoming known to Mr Merdle on this side
of the Alps or Mediterranean, I shall have that honour on returning to
England. It is an honour I particularly desire and shall particularly
esteem.'

'Mr Merdle,' said Mrs Merdle, who had been looking admiringly at Fanny
through her eye-glass, 'will esteem it, I am sure, no less.'

Little Dorrit, still habitually thoughtful and solitary though no longer
alone, at first supposed this to be mere Prunes and Prism. But as her
father when they had been to a brilliant reception at Mrs Merdle's,
harped at their own family breakfast-table on his wish to know Mr
Merdle, with the contingent view of benefiting by the advice of that
wonderful man in the disposal of his fortune, she began to think it had
a real meaning, and to entertain a curiosity on her own part to see the
shining light of the time.




CHAPTER 8. The Dowager Mrs Gowan is reminded that 'It Never Does'


While the waters of Venice and the ruins of Rome were sunning themselves
for the pleasure of the Dorrit family, and were daily being sketched
out of all earthly proportion, lineament, and likeness, by travelling
pencils innumerable, the firm of Doyce and Clennam hammered away in
Bleeding Heart Yard, and the vigorous clink of iron upon iron was heard
there through the working hours.

The younger partner had, by this time, brought the business into sound
trim; and the elder, left free to follow his own ingenious devices, had
done much to enhance the character of the factory. As an ingenious man,
he had necessarily to encounter every discouragement that the ruling
powers for a length of time had been able by any means to put in the way
of this class of culprits; but that was only reasonable self-defence in
the powers, since How to do it must obviously be regarded as the natural
and mortal enemy of How not to do it. In this was to be found the basis
of the wise system, by tooth and nail upheld by the Circumlocution
Office, of warning every ingenious British subject to be ingenious
at his peril: of harassing him, obstructing him, inviting robbers (by
making his remedy uncertain, and expensive) to plunder him, and at the
best of confiscating his property after a short term of enjoyment, as
though invention were on a par with felony. The system had uniformly
found great favour with the Barnacles, and that was only reasonable,
too; for one who worthily invents must be in earnest, and the Barnacles
abhorred and dreaded nothing half so much. That again was very
reasonable; since in a country suffering under the affliction of a great
amount of earnestness, there might, in an exceeding short space of time,
be not a single Barnacle left sticking to a post.

Daniel Doyce faced his condition with its pains and penalties attached
to it, and soberly worked on for the work's sake. Clennam cheering him
with a hearty co-operation, was a moral support to him, besides doing
good service in his business relation. The concern prospered, and the
partners were fast friends.

But Daniel could not forget the old design of so many years. It was not
in reason to be expected that he should; if he could have lightly
forgotten it, he could never have conceived it, or had the patience and
perseverance to work it out. So Clennam thought, when he sometimes
observed him of an evening looking over the models and drawings, and
consoling himself by muttering with a sigh as he put them away again,
that the thing was as true as it ever was.

To show no sympathy with so much endeavour, and so much disappointment,
would have been to fail in what Clennam regarded as among the implied
obligations of his partnership. A revival of the passing interest in
the subject which had been by chance awakened at the door of the
Circumlocution Office, originated in this feeling. He asked his partner
to explain the invention to him; 'having a lenient consideration,' he
stipulated, 'for my being no workman, Doyce.'

'No workman?' said Doyce. 'You would have been a thorough workman if you
had given yourself to it. You have as good a head for understanding such
things as I have met with.'

'A totally uneducated one, I am sorry to add,' said Clennam.

'I don't know that,' returned Doyce, 'and I wouldn't have you say
that. No man of sense who has been generally improved, and has improved
himself, can be called quite uneducated as to anything. I don't
particularly favour mysteries. I would as soon, on a fair and clear
explanation, be judged by one class of man as another, provided he had
the qualification I have named.'

'At all events,' said Clennam--'this sounds as if we were exchanging
compliments, but we know we are not--I shall have the advantage of as
plain an explanation as can be given.'

'Well!' said Daniel, in his steady even way,'I'll try to make it so.'

He had the power, often to be found in union with such a character, of
explaining what he himself perceived, and meant, with the direct force
and distinctness with which it struck his own mind. His manner of
demonstration was so orderly and neat and simple, that it was not easy
to mistake him. There was something almost ludicrous in the complete
irreconcilability of a vague conventional notion that he must be a
visionary man, with the precise, sagacious travelling of his eye and
thumb over the plans, their patient stoppages at particular points,
their careful returns to other points whence little channels of
explanation had to be traced up, and his steady manner of making
everything good and everything sound at each important stage, before
taking his hearer on a line's-breadth further. His dismissal of himself
from his description, was hardly less remarkable. He never said, I
discovered this adaptation or invented that combination; but showed the
whole thing as if the Divine artificer had made it, and he had happened
to find it; so modest he was about it, such a pleasant touch of respect
was mingled with his quiet admiration of it, and so calmly convinced he
was that it was established on irrefragable laws.

Not only that evening, but for several succeeding evenings, Clennam was
quite charmed by this investigation. The more he pursued it, and the
oftener he glanced at the grey head bending over it, and the shrewd eye
kindling with pleasure in it and love of it--instrument for probing his
heart though it had been made for twelve long years--the less he could
reconcile it to his younger energy to let it go without one effort more.
At length he said:

'Doyce, it came to this at last--that the business was to be sunk with
Heaven knows how many more wrecks, or begun all over again?'

'Yes,' returned Doyce, 'that's what the noblemen and gentlemen made of
it after a dozen years.'

'And pretty fellows too!' said Clennam, bitterly.

'The usual thing!' observed Doyce. 'I must not make a martyr of myself,
when I am one of so large a company.'

'Relinquish it, or begin it all over again?' mused Clennam.

'That was exactly the long and the short of it,' said Doyce.

'Then, my friend,' cried Clennam, starting up and taking his
work-roughened hand, 'it shall be begun all over again!'

Doyce looked alarmed, and replied in a hurry--for him, 'No, no. Better
put it by. Far better put it by. It will be heard of, one day. I can
put it by. You forget, my good Clennam; I _have_ put it by. It's all at an
end.'

'Yes, Doyce,' returned Clennam, 'at an end as far as your efforts and
rebuffs are concerned, I admit, but not as far as mine are. I am younger
than you: I have only once set foot in that precious office, and I am
fresh game for them. Come! I'll try them. You shall do exactly as you
have been doing since we have been together. I will add (as I easily
can) to what I have been doing, the attempt to get public justice done
to you; and, unless I have some success to report, you shall hear no
more of it.'

Daniel Doyce was still reluctant to consent, and again and again urged
that they had better put it by. But it was natural that he should
gradually allow himself to be over-persuaded by Clennam, and should
yield. Yield he did. So Arthur resumed the long and hopeless labour of
striving to make way with the Circumlocution Office.

The waiting-rooms of that Department soon began to be familiar with his
presence, and he was generally ushered into them by its janitors much
as a pickpocket might be shown into a police-office; the principal
difference being that the object of the latter class of public business
is to keep the pickpocket, while the Circumlocution object was to
get rid of Clennam. However, he was resolved to stick to the Great
Department; and so the work of form-filling, corresponding, minuting,
memorandum-making, signing, counter-signing, counter-counter-signing,
referring backwards and forwards, and referring sideways, crosswise, and
zig-zag, recommenced.

Here arises a feature of the Circumlocution Office, not previously
mentioned in the present record. When that admirable Department got
into trouble, and was, by some infuriated members of Parliament whom
the smaller Barnacles almost suspected of labouring under diabolic
possession, attacked on the merits of no individual case, but as an
Institution wholly abominable and Bedlamite; then the noble or right
