trembled so that she had much ado to hold her needle. Clennam gently
put his hand upon her work, and said, 'Dear Little Dorrit, let me lay it
down.'

She yielded it to him, and he put it aside. Her hands were then
nervously clasping together, but he took one of them.

'How seldom I have seen you lately, Little Dorrit!'

'I have been busy, sir.'

'But I heard only to-day,' said Clennam, 'by mere accident, of your
having been with those good people close by me. Why not come to me,
then?'

'I--I don't know. Or rather, I thought you might be busy too. You
generally are now, are you not?'

He saw her trembling little form and her downcast face, and the eyes
that drooped the moment they were raised to his--he saw them almost with
as much concern as tenderness.

'My child, your manner is so changed!'

The trembling was now quite beyond her control. Softly withdrawing her
hand, and laying it in her other hand, she sat before him with her head
bent and her whole form trembling.

'My own Little Dorrit,' said Clennam, compassionately.

She burst into tears. Maggy looked round of a sudden, and stared for at
least a minute; but did not interpose. Clennam waited some little while
before he spoke again.

'I cannot bear,' he said then, 'to see you weep; but I hope this is a
relief to an overcharged heart.'

'Yes it is, sir. Nothing but that.'

'Well, well! I feared you would think too much of what passed here just
now. It is of no moment; not the least. I am only unfortunate to have
come in the way. Let it go by with these tears. It is not worth one of
them. One of them? Such an idle thing should be repeated, with my glad
consent, fifty times a day, to save you a moment's heart-ache, Little
Dorrit.'

She had taken courage now, and answered, far more in her usual manner,
'You are so good! But even if there was nothing else in it to be sorry
for and ashamed of, it is such a bad return to you--'

'Hush!' said Clennam, smiling and touching her lips with his hand.
'Forgetfulness in you who remember so many and so much, would be new
indeed. Shall I remind you that I am not, and that I never was, anything
but the friend whom you agreed to trust? No. You remember it, don't
you?'

'I try to do so, or I should have broken the promise just now, when my
mistaken brother was here. You will consider his bringing-up in this
place, and will not judge him hardly, poor fellow, I know!' In raising
her eyes with these words, she observed his face more nearly than she
had done yet, and said, with a quick change of tone, 'You have not been
ill, Mr Clennam?'

'No.'

'Nor tried? Nor hurt?' she asked him, anxiously.

It fell to Clennam now, to be not quite certain how to answer. He said
in reply:

'To speak the truth, I have been a little troubled, but it is over.
Do I show it so plainly? I ought to have more fortitude and self-command
than that. I thought I had. I must learn them of you. Who could teach me
better!'

He never thought that she saw in him what no one else could see. He
never thought that in the whole world there were no other eyes that
looked upon him with the same light and strength as hers.

'But it brings me to something that I wish to say,' he continued, 'and
therefore I will not quarrel even with my own face for telling tales
and being unfaithful to me. Besides, it is a privilege and pleasure to
confide in my Little Dorrit. Let me confess then, that, forgetting how
grave I was, and how old I was, and how the time for such things had
gone by me with the many years of sameness and little happiness that
made up my long life far away, without marking it--that, forgetting all
this, I fancied I loved some one.'

'Do I know her, sir?' asked Little Dorrit.

'No, my child.'

'Not the lady who has been kind to me for your sake?'

'Flora. No, no. Do you think--'

'I never quite thought so,' said Little Dorrit, more to herself than
him. 'I did wonder at it a little.'

'Well!' said Clennam, abiding by the feeling that had fallen on him in
the avenue on the night of the roses, the feeling that he was an
older man, who had done with that tender part of life, 'I found out my
mistake, and I thought about it a little--in short, a good deal--and got
wiser. Being wiser, I counted up my years and considered what I am, and
looked back, and looked forward, and found that I should soon be grey. I
found that I had climbed the hill, and passed the level ground upon the
top, and was descending quickly.'

If he had known the sharpness of the pain he caused the patient heart,
in speaking thus! While doing it, too, with the purpose of easing and
serving her.

'I found that the day when any such thing would have been graceful in
me, or good in me, or hopeful or happy for me or any one in connection
with me, was gone, and would never shine again.'

O! If he had known, if he had known! If he could have seen the dagger in
his hand, and the cruel wounds it struck in the faithful bleeding breast
of his Little Dorrit!

'All that is over, and I have turned my face from it. Why do I speak of
this to Little Dorrit? Why do I show you, my child, the space of years
that there is between us, and recall to you that I have passed, by the
amount of your whole life, the time that is present to you?'

'Because you trust me, I hope. Because you know that nothing can touch
you without touching me; that nothing can make you happy or unhappy, but
it must make me, who am so grateful to you, the same.'

He heard the thrill in her voice, he saw her earnest face, he saw her
clear true eyes, he saw the quickened bosom that would have joyfully
thrown itself before him to receive a mortal wound directed at his
breast, with the dying cry, 'I love him!' and the remotest suspicion
of the truth never dawned upon his mind. No. He saw the devoted little
creature with her worn shoes, in her common dress, in her jail-home; a
slender child in body, a strong heroine in soul; and the light of her
domestic story made all else dark to him.

'For those reasons assuredly, Little Dorrit, but for another too. So
far removed, so different, and so much older, I am the better fitted for
your friend and adviser. I mean, I am the more easily to be trusted;
and any little constraint that you might feel with another, may vanish
before me. Why have you kept so retired from me? Tell me.'

'I am better here. My place and use are here. I am much better here,'
said Little Dorrit, faintly.

'So you said that day upon the bridge. I thought of it much afterwards.
Have you no secret you could entrust to me, with hope and comfort, if
you would!'

'Secret? No, I have no secret,' said Little Dorrit in some trouble.

They had been speaking in low voices; more because it was natural to
what they said to adopt that tone, than with any care to reserve it from
Maggy at her work. All of a sudden Maggy stared again, and this time
spoke:

'I say! Little Mother!'

'Yes, Maggy.'

'If you an't got no secret of your own to tell him, tell him that about
the Princess. _She_ had a secret, you know.'

'The Princess had a secret?' said Clennam, in some surprise. 'What
Princess was that, Maggy?'

'Lor! How you do go and bother a gal of ten,' said Maggy, 'catching the
poor thing up in that way. Whoever said the Princess had a secret? _I_
never said so.'

'I beg your pardon. I thought you did.'

'No, I didn't. How could I, when it was her as wanted to find it out? It
was the little woman as had the secret, and she was always a spinning at
her wheel. And so she says to her, why do you keep it there? And so the
t'other one says to her, no I don't; and so the t'other one says to her,
yes you do; and then they both goes to the cupboard, and there it is.
And she wouldn't go into the Hospital, and so she died. _You_ know, Little
Mother; tell him that. For it was a reg'lar good secret, that was!' cried
Maggy, hugging herself.

Arthur looked at Little Dorrit for help to comprehend this, and was
struck by seeing her so timid and red. But, when she told him that it
was only a Fairy Tale she had one day made up for Maggy, and that there
was nothing in it which she wouldn't be ashamed to tell again to anybody
else, even if she could remember it, he left the subject where it was.

However, he returned to his own subject by first entreating her to see
him oftener, and to remember that it was impossible to have a stronger
interest in her welfare than he had, or to be more set upon promoting it
than he was. When she answered fervently, she well knew that, she never
forgot it, he touched upon his second and more delicate point--the
suspicion he had formed.

'Little Dorrit,' he said, taking her hand again, and speaking lower than
he had spoken yet, so that even Maggy in the small room could not hear
him, 'another word. I have wanted very much to say this to you; I have
tried for opportunities. Don't mind me, who, for the matter of years,
might be your father or your uncle. Always think of me as quite an
old man. I know that all your devotion centres in this room, and
that nothing to the last will ever tempt you away from the duties you
discharge here. If I were not sure of it, I should, before now, have
implored you, and implored your father, to let me make some provision
for you in a more suitable place. But you may have an interest--I will
not say, now, though even that might be--may have, at another time,
an interest in some one else; an interest not incompatible with your
affection here.'

She was very, very pale, and silently shook her head.

'It may be, dear Little Dorrit.'

'No. No. No.' She shook her head, after each slow repetition of
the word, with an air of quiet desolation that he remembered long
afterwards. The time came when he remembered it well, long afterwards,
within those prison walls; within that very room.

'But, if it ever should be, tell me so, my dear child. Entrust the truth
to me, point out the object of such an interest to me, and I will try
with all the zeal, and honour, and friendship and respect that I feel
for you, good Little Dorrit of my heart, to do you a lasting service.'

'O thank you, thank you! But, O no, O no, O no!' She said this, looking
at him with her work-worn hands folded together, and in the same
resigned accents as before.

'I press for no confidence now. I only ask you to repose unhesitating
trust in me.'

'Can I do less than that, when you are so good!'

'Then you will trust me fully? Will have no secret unhappiness, or
anxiety, concealed from me?'

'Almost none.'

'And you have none now?'

She shook her head. But she was very pale.

'When I lie down to-night, and my thoughts come back--as they will, for
they do every night, even when I have not seen you--to this sad place, I
may believe that there is no grief beyond this room, now, and its usual
occupants, which preys on Little Dorrit's mind?'

She seemed to catch at these words--that he remembered, too, long
afterwards--and said, more brightly, 'Yes, Mr Clennam; yes, you may!'

The crazy staircase, usually not slow to give notice when any one was
coming up or down, here creaked under a quick tread, and a further sound
was heard upon it, as if a little steam-engine with more steam than it
knew what to do with, were working towards the room. As it approached,
which it did very rapidly, it laboured with increased energy; and,
after knocking at the door, it sounded as if it were stooping down and
snorting in at the keyhole.

Before Maggy could open the door, Mr Pancks, opening it from without,
stood without a hat and with his bare head in the wildest condition,
looking at Clennam and Little Dorrit, over her shoulder. He had a
lighted cigar in his hand, and brought with him airs of ale and tobacco
smoke.

'Pancks the gipsy,' he observed out of breath, 'fortune-telling.'

He stood dingily smiling, and breathing hard at them, with a most
curious air; as if, instead of being his proprietor's grubber, he were
the triumphant proprietor of the Marshalsea, the Marshal, all the
turnkeys, and all the Collegians. In his great self-satisfaction he put
his cigar to his lips (being evidently no smoker), and took such a pull
at it, with his right eye shut up tight for the purpose, that he
underwent a convulsion of shuddering and choking. But even in the midst
of that paroxysm, he still essayed to repeat his favourite introduction
of himself, 'Pa-ancks the gi-ipsy, fortune-telling.'

'I am spending the evening with the rest of 'em,' said Pancks. 'I've
been singing. I've been taking a part in White sand and grey sand.
_I_ don't know anything about it. Never mind. I'll take any part in
anything. It's all the same, if you're loud enough.'

At first Clennam supposed him to be intoxicated. But he soon perceived
that though he might be a little the worse (or better) for ale, the
staple of his excitement was not brewed from malt, or distilled from any
grain or berry.

'How d'ye do, Miss Dorrit?' said Pancks. 'I thought you wouldn't mind my
running round, and looking in for a moment. Mr Clennam I heard was here,
from Mr Dorrit. How are you, Sir?'

Clennam thanked him, and said he was glad to see him so gay.

'Gay!' said Pancks. 'I'm in wonderful feather, sir. I can't stop a
minute, or I shall be missed, and I don't want 'em to miss me.--Eh, Miss
Dorrit?'

He seemed to have an insatiate delight in appealing to her and looking
at her; excitedly sticking his hair up at the same moment, like a dark
species of cockatoo.

'I haven't been here half an hour. I knew Mr Dorrit was in the chair,
and I said, "I'll go and support him!" I ought to be down in Bleeding
Heart Yard by rights; but I can worry them to-morrow.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

His little black eyes sparkled electrically. His very hair seemed to
sparkle as he roughened it. He was in that highly-charged state that one
might have expected to draw sparks and snaps from him by presenting a
knuckle to any part of his figure.

'Capital company here,' said Pancks.--'Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

She was half afraid of him, and irresolute what to say. He laughed, with
a nod towards Clennam.

'Don't mind him, Miss Dorrit. He's one of us. We agreed that you
shouldn't take on to mind me before people, but we didn't mean Mr
Clennam. He's one of us. He's in it. An't you, Mr Clennam?--Eh, Miss
Dorrit?'

The excitement of this strange creature was fast communicating itself to
Clennam. Little Dorrit with amazement, saw this, and observed that they
exchanged quick looks.

'I was making a remark,' said Pancks, 'but I declare I forget what
it was. Oh, I know! Capital company here. I've been treating 'em all
round.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

'Very generous of you,' she returned, noticing another of the quick
looks between the two.

'Not at all,' said Pancks. 'Don't mention it. I'm coming into my
property, that's the fact. I can afford to be liberal. I think I'll give
'em a treat here. Tables laid in the yard. Bread in stacks. Pipes in
faggots. Tobacco in hayloads. Roast beef and plum-pudding for every one.
Quart of double stout a head. Pint of wine too, if they like it, and the
authorities give permission.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

She was thrown into such a confusion by his manner, or rather by
Clennam's growing understanding of his manner (for she looked to him
after every fresh appeal and cockatoo demonstration on the part of Mr
Pancks), that she only moved her lips in answer, without forming any
word.

'And oh, by-the-bye!' said Pancks, 'you were to live to know what was
behind us on that little hand of yours. And so you shall, you shall, my
darling.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

He had suddenly checked himself. Where he got all the additional black
prongs from, that now flew up all over his head like the myriads of
points that break out in the large change of a great firework, was a
wonderful mystery.

'But I shall be missed;' he came back to that; 'and I don't want 'em to
miss me. Mr Clennam, you and I made a bargain. I said you should find me
stick to it. You shall find me stick to it now, sir, if you'll step out
of the room a moment. Miss Dorrit, I wish you good night. Miss Dorrit, I
wish you good fortune.'

He rapidly shook her by both hands, and puffed down stairs. Arthur
followed him with such a hurried step, that he had very nearly tumbled
over him on the last landing, and rolled him down into the yard.

'What is it, for Heaven's sake!' Arthur demanded, when they burst out
there both together.

'Stop a moment, sir. Mr Rugg. Let me introduce him.'

With those words he presented another man without a hat, and also with a
cigar, and also surrounded with a halo of ale and tobacco smoke, which
man, though not so excited as himself, was in a state which would have
been akin to lunacy but for its fading into sober method when compared
with the rampancy of Mr Pancks.

'Mr Clennam, Mr Rugg,' said Pancks. 'Stop a moment. Come to the pump.'

They adjourned to the pump. Mr Pancks, instantly putting his head under
the spout, requested Mr Rugg to take a good strong turn at the handle.
Mr Rugg complying to the letter, Mr Pancks came forth snorting and
blowing to some purpose, and dried himself on his handkerchief.

'I am the clearer for that,' he gasped to Clennam standing astonished.
'But upon my soul, to hear her father making speeches in that chair,
knowing what we know, and to see her up in that room in that dress,
knowing what we know, is enough to--give me a back, Mr Rugg--a little
higher, sir,--that'll do!'

Then and there, on that Marshalsea pavement, in the shades of evening,
did Mr Pancks, of all mankind, fly over the head and shoulders of Mr
Rugg of Pentonville, General Agent, Accountant, and Recoverer of Debts.
Alighting on his feet, he took Clennam by the button-hole, led him
behind the pump, and pantingly produced from his pocket a bundle of
papers.

Mr Rugg, also, pantingly produced from his pocket a bundle of papers.

'Stay!' said Clennam in a whisper.'You have made a discovery.'

Mr Pancks answered, with an unction which there is no language to
convey, 'We rather think so.'

'Does it implicate any one?'

'How implicate, sir?'

'In any suppression or wrong dealing of any kind?'

'Not a bit of it.'

'Thank God!' said Clennam to himself. 'Now show me.'

'You are to understand'--snorted Pancks, feverishly unfolding papers,
and speaking in short high-pressure blasts of sentences, 'Where's the
Pedigree? Where's Schedule number four, Mr Rugg? Oh! all right! Here we
are.--You are to understand that we are this very day virtually
complete. We shan't be legally for a day or two. Call it at the outside
a week. We've been at it night and day for I don't know how long. Mr
Rugg, you know how long? Never mind. Don't say. You'll only confuse me.
You shall tell her, Mr Clennam. Not till we give you leave. Where's that
rough total, Mr Rugg? Oh! Here we are! There sir! That's what you'll
have to break to her. That man's your Father of the Marshalsea!'




CHAPTER 33. Mrs Merdle's Complaint


Resigning herself to inevitable fate by making the best of those people,
the Miggleses, and submitting her philosophy to the draught upon it, of
which she had foreseen the likelihood in her interview with Arthur,
Mrs Gowan handsomely resolved not to oppose her son's marriage. In her
progress to, and happy arrival at, this resolution, she was possibly
influenced, not only by her maternal affections but by three politic
considerations.

Of these, the first may have been that her son had never signified the
smallest intention to ask her consent, or any mistrust of his ability
to dispense with it; the second, that the pension bestowed upon her by a
grateful country (and a Barnacle) would be freed from any little filial
inroads, when her Henry should be married to the darling only child of
a man in very easy circumstances; the third, that Henry's debts must
clearly be paid down upon the altar-railing by his father-in-law. When,
to these three-fold points of prudence there is added the fact that
Mrs Gowan yielded her consent the moment she knew of Mr Meagles having
yielded his, and that Mr Meagles's objection to the marriage had
been the sole obstacle in its way all along, it becomes the height of
probability that the relict of the deceased Commissioner of nothing
particular, turned these ideas in her sagacious mind.

Among her connections and acquaintances, however, she maintained her
individual dignity and the dignity of the blood of the Barnacles, by
diligently nursing the pretence that it was a most unfortunate business;
that she was sadly cut up by it; that this was a perfect fascination
under which Henry laboured; that she had opposed it for a long time,
but what could a mother do; and the like. She had already called Arthur
Clennam to bear witness to this fable, as a friend of the Meagles
family; and she followed up the move by now impounding the family itself
for the same purpose. In the first interview she accorded to Mr Meagles,
she slided herself into the position of disconsolately but gracefully
yielding to irresistible pressure. With the utmost politeness and
good-breeding, she feigned that it was she--not he--who had made the
difficulty, and who at length gave way; and that the sacrifice was
hers--not his. The same feint, with the same polite dexterity, she
foisted on Mrs Meagles, as a conjuror might have forced a card on that
innocent lady; and, when her future daughter-in-law was presented to her
by her son, she said on embracing her, 'My dear, what have you done to
Henry that has bewitched him so!' at the same time allowing a few tears
to carry before them, in little pills, the cosmetic powder on her nose;
as a delicate but touching signal that she suffered much inwardly for
the show of composure with which she bore her misfortune.

Among the friends of Mrs Gowan (who piqued herself at once on being
Society, and on maintaining intimate and easy relations with that
Power), Mrs Merdle occupied a front row. True, the Hampton Court
Bohemians, without exception, turned up their noses at Merdle as an
upstart; but they turned them down again, by falling flat on their faces
to worship his wealth. In which compensating adjustment of their noses,
they were pretty much like Treasury, Bar, and Bishop, and all the rest
of them.

To Mrs Merdle, Mrs Gowan repaired on a visit of self-condolence, after
having given the gracious consent aforesaid. She drove into town for the
purpose in a one-horse carriage irreverently called at that period of
English history, a pill-box. It belonged to a job-master in a small way,
who drove it himself, and who jobbed it by the day, or hour, to most of
the old ladies in Hampton Court Palace; but it was a point of ceremony,
in that encampment, that the whole equipage should be tacitly regarded
as the private property of the jobber for the time being, and that the
job-master should betray personal knowledge of nobody but the jobber
in possession. So the Circumlocution Barnacles, who were the largest
job-masters in the universe, always pretended to know of no other job
but the job immediately in hand.

Mrs Merdle was at home, and was in her nest of crimson and gold, with
the parrot on a neighbouring stem watching her with his head on one
side, as if he took her for another splendid parrot of a larger species.
To whom entered Mrs Gowan, with her favourite green fan, which softened
the light on the spots of bloom.

'My dear soul,' said Mrs Gowan, tapping the back of her friend's hand
with this fan after a little indifferent conversation, 'you are my only
comfort. That affair of Henry's that I told you of, is to take place.
Now, how does it strike you? I am dying to know, because you represent
and express Society so well.'

Mrs Merdle reviewed the bosom which Society was accustomed to review;
and having ascertained that show-window of Mr Merdle's and the London
jewellers' to be in good order, replied:

'As to marriage on the part of a man, my dear, Society requires that
he should retrieve his fortunes by marriage. Society requires that
he should gain by marriage. Society requires that he should found a
handsome establishment by marriage. Society does not see, otherwise,
what he has to do with marriage. Bird, be quiet!'

For the parrot on his cage above them, presiding over the conference as
if he were a judge (and indeed he looked rather like one), had wound up
the exposition with a shriek.

'Cases there are,' said Mrs Merdle, delicately crooking the little
finger of her favourite hand, and making her remarks neater by that neat
action; 'cases there are where a man is not young or elegant, and is
rich, and has a handsome establishment already. Those are of a different
kind. In such cases--'

Mrs Merdle shrugged her snowy shoulders and put her hand upon the
jewel-stand, checking a little cough, as though to add, 'why, a man
looks out for this sort of thing, my dear.' Then the parrot shrieked
again, and she put up her glass to look at him, and said, 'Bird! Do be
quiet!'

'But, young men,' resumed Mrs Merdle, 'and by young men you know
what I mean, my love--I mean people's sons who have the world before
them--they must place themselves in a better position towards Society by
marriage, or Society really will not have any patience with their making
fools of themselves. Dreadfully worldly all this sounds,' said Mrs
Merdle, leaning back in her nest and putting up her glass again, 'does
it not?'

'But it is true,' said Mrs Gowan, with a highly moral air.

'My dear, it is not to be disputed for a moment,' returned Mrs Merdle;
'because Society has made up its mind on the subject, and there is
nothing more to be said. If we were in a more primitive state, if we
lived under roofs of leaves, and kept cows and sheep and creatures
instead of banker's accounts (which would be delicious; my dear, I am
pastoral to a degree, by nature), well and good. But we don't live
under leaves, and keep cows and sheep and creatures. I perfectly exhaust
myself sometimes, in pointing out the distinction to Edmund Sparkler.'

Mrs Gowan, looking over her green fan when this young gentleman's name
was mentioned, replied as follows:

'My love, you know the wretched state of the country--those unfortunate
concessions of John Barnacle's!--and you therefore know the reasons for
my being as poor as Thingummy.'

'A church mouse?' Mrs Merdle suggested with a smile.

'I was thinking of the other proverbial church person--Job,' said Mrs
Gowan. 'Either will do. It would be idle to disguise, consequently, that
there is a wide difference between the position of your son and mine. I
may add, too, that Henry has talent--'

'Which Edmund certainly has not,' said Mrs Merdle, with the greatest
suavity.

'--and that his talent, combined with disappointment,' Mrs Gowan went
on, 'has led him into a pursuit which--ah dear me! You know, my dear.
Such being Henry's different position, the question is what is the most
inferior class of marriage to which I can reconcile myself.'

Mrs Merdle was so much engaged with the contemplation of her arms
(beautiful-formed arms, and the very thing for bracelets), that she
omitted to reply for a while. Roused at length by the silence, she
folded the arms, and with admirable presence of mind looked her friend
full in the face, and said interrogatively, 'Ye-es? And then?'

'And then, my dear,' said Mrs Gowan not quite so sweetly as before, 'I
should be glad to hear what you have to say to it.'

Here the parrot, who had been standing on one leg since he screamed
last, burst into a fit of laughter, bobbed himself derisively up and
down on both legs, and finished by standing on one leg again, and
pausing for a reply, with his head as much awry as he could possibly
twist it.

'Sounds mercenary to ask what the gentleman is to get with the lady,'
said Mrs Merdle; 'but Society is perhaps a little mercenary, you know,
my dear.'

'From what I can make out,' said Mrs Gowan, 'I believe I may say that
Henry will be relieved from debt--'

'Much in debt?' asked Mrs Merdle through her eyeglass.

'Why tolerably, I should think,' said Mrs Gowan.

'Meaning the usual thing; I understand; just so,' Mrs Merdle observed in
a comfortable sort of way.

'And that the father will make them an allowance of three hundred
a-year, or perhaps altogether something more, which, in Italy-'

'Oh! Going to Italy?' said Mrs Merdle.

'For Henry to study. You need be at no loss to guess why, my dear.
That dreadful Art--'

True. Mrs Merdle hastened to spare the feelings of her afflicted friend.
She understood. Say no more!

'And that,' said Mrs Gowan, shaking her despondent head, 'that's all.
That,' repeated Mrs Gowan, furling her green fan for the moment, and
tapping her chin with it (it was on the way to being a double chin;
might be called a chin and a half at present), 'that's all! On the death
of the old people, I suppose there will be more to come; but how it may
be restricted or locked up, I don't know. And as to that, they may live
for ever. My dear, they are just the kind of people to do it.'

Now, Mrs Merdle, who really knew her friend Society pretty well, and who
knew what Society's mothers were, and what Society's daughters were, and
what Society's matrimonial market was, and how prices ruled in it, and
what scheming and counter-scheming took place for the high buyers, and
what bargaining and huckstering went on, thought in the depths of
her capacious bosom that this was a sufficiently good catch. Knowing,
however, what was expected of her, and perceiving the exact nature of
the fiction to be nursed, she took it delicately in her arms, and put
her required contribution of gloss upon it.

'And that is all, my dear?' said she, heaving a friendly sigh. 'Well,
well! The fault is not yours. You have nothing to reproach yourself
with. You must exercise the strength of mind for which you are renowned,
and make the best of it.'

'The girl's family have made,' said Mrs Gowan, 'of course, the most
strenuous endeavours to--as the lawyers say--to have and to hold Henry.'

'Of course they have, my dear,' said Mrs Merdle.

'I have persisted in every possible objection, and have worried
myself morning, noon, and night, for means to detach Henry from the
connection.'

'No doubt you have, my dear,' said Mrs Merdle.

'And all of no use. All has broken down beneath me. Now tell me, my
love. Am I justified in at last yielding my most reluctant consent to
Henry's marrying among people not in Society; or, have I acted with
inexcusable weakness?'

In answer to this direct appeal, Mrs Merdle assured Mrs Gowan (speaking
as a Priestess of Society) that she was highly to be commended, that
she was much to be sympathised with, that she had taken the highest of
parts, and had come out of the furnace refined. And Mrs Gowan, who of
course saw through her own threadbare blind perfectly, and who knew that
Mrs Merdle saw through it perfectly, and who knew that Society would see
through it perfectly, came out of this form, notwithstanding, as she had
gone into it, with immense complacency and gravity.

The conference was held at four or five o'clock in the afternoon, when
all the region of Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was resonant of
carriage-wheels and double-knocks. It had reached this point when Mr
Merdle came home from his daily occupation of causing the British
name to be more and more respected in all parts of the civilised globe
capable of the appreciation of world-wide commercial enterprise and
gigantic combinations of skill and capital. For, though nobody knew with
the least precision what Mr Merdle's business was, except that it was
to coin money, these were the terms in which everybody defined it on all
ceremonious occasions, and which it was the last new polite reading of
the parable of the camel and the needle's eye to accept without inquiry.

For a gentleman who had this splendid work cut out for him, Mr Merdle
looked a little common, and rather as if, in the course of his vast
transactions, he had accidentally made an interchange of heads with
some inferior spirit. He presented himself before the two ladies in the
course of a dismal stroll through his mansion, which had no apparent
object but escape from the presence of the chief butler.

'I beg your pardon,' he said, stopping short in confusion; 'I didn't
know there was anybody here but the parrot.'

However, as Mrs Merdle said, 'You can come in!' and as Mrs Gowan said
she was just going, and had already risen to take her leave, he came in,
and stood looking out at a distant window, with his hands crossed under
his uneasy coat-cuffs, clasping his wrists as if he were taking himself
into custody. In this attitude he fell directly into a reverie from
which he was only aroused by his wife's calling to him from her ottoman,
when they had been for some quarter of an hour alone.

'Eh? Yes?' said Mr Merdle, turning towards her. 'What is it?'

'What is it?' repeated Mrs Merdle. 'It is, I suppose, that you have not
heard a word of my complaint.'

'Your complaint, Mrs Merdle?' said Mr Merdle. 'I didn't know that you
were suffering from a complaint. What complaint?'

'A complaint of you,' said Mrs Merdle.

'Oh! A complaint of me,' said Mr Merdle. 'What is the--what have I--what
may you have to complain of in me, Mrs Merdle?'

In his withdrawing, abstracted, pondering way, it took him some time to
shape this question. As a kind of faint attempt to convince himself
that he was the master of the house, he concluded by presenting his
forefinger to the parrot, who expressed his opinion on that subject by
instantly driving his bill into it.

'You were saying, Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle, with his wounded finger
in his mouth, 'that you had a complaint against me?'

'A complaint which I could scarcely show the justice of more
emphatically, than by having to repeat it,' said Mrs Merdle. 'I might as
well have stated it to the wall. I had far better have stated it to the
bird. He would at least have screamed.'

'You don't want me to scream, Mrs Merdle, I suppose,' said Mr Merdle,
taking a chair.

'Indeed I don't know,' retorted Mrs Merdle, 'but that you had better do
that, than be so moody and distraught. One would at least know that you
were sensible of what was going on around you.'

'A man might scream, and yet not be that, Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle,
heavily.

'And might be dogged, as you are at present, without screaming,'
returned Mrs Merdle. 'That's very true. If you wish to know the
complaint I make against you, it is, in so many plain words, that you
really ought not to go into Society unless you can accommodate yourself
to Society.'

Mr Merdle, so twisting his hands into what hair he had upon his head
that he seemed to lift himself up by it as he started out of his chair,
cried:

'Why, in the name of all the infernal powers, Mrs Merdle, who
does more for Society than I do? Do you see these premises, Mrs Merdle?
Do you see this furniture, Mrs Merdle? Do you look in the glass and see
yourself, Mrs Merdle? Do you know the cost of all this, and who it's
all provided for? And yet will you tell me that I oughtn't to go into
Society? I, who shower money upon it in this way? I, who might always be
said--to--to--to harness myself to a watering-cart full of money, and go
about saturating Society every day of my life.'

'Pray, don't be violent, Mr Merdle,' said Mrs Merdle.

'Violent?' said Mr Merdle. 'You are enough to make me desperate. You
don't know half of what I do to accommodate Society. You don't know
anything of the sacrifices I make for it.'

'I know,' returned Mrs Merdle, 'that you receive the best in the land. I
know that you move in the whole Society of the country. And I believe
I know (indeed, not to make any ridiculous pretence about it, I know I
know) who sustains you in it, Mr Merdle.'

'Mrs Merdle,' retorted that gentleman, wiping his dull red and yellow
face, 'I know that as well as you do. If you were not an ornament to
Society, and if I was not a benefactor to Society, you and I would never
have come together. When I say a benefactor to it, I mean a person who
provides it with all sorts of expensive things to eat and drink and look
at. But, to tell me that I am not fit for it after all I have done
for it--after all I have done for it,' repeated Mr Merdle, with a wild
emphasis that made his wife lift up her eyelids, 'after all--all!--to
tell me I have no right to mix with it after all, is a pretty reward.'

'I say,' answered Mrs Merdle composedly, 'that you ought to make
yourself fit for it by being more degage, and less preoccupied. There is
a positive vulgarity in carrying your business affairs about with you as
you do.'

'How do I carry them about, Mrs Merdle?' asked Mr Merdle.

'How do you carry them about?' said Mrs Merdle. 'Look at yourself in the
glass.'

Mr Merdle involuntarily turned his eyes in the direction of the nearest
mirror, and asked, with a slow determination of his turbid blood to his
temples, whether a man was to be called to account for his digestion?

'You have a physician,' said Mrs Merdle.

'He does me no good,' said Mr Merdle.

Mrs Merdle changed her ground.

'Besides,' said she, 'your digestion is nonsense. I don't speak of your
digestion. I speak of your manner.'

'Mrs Merdle,' returned her husband, 'I look to you for that. You supply
manner, and I supply money.'

'I don't expect you,' said Mrs Merdle, reposing easily among her
cushions, 'to captivate people. I don't want you to take any trouble
upon yourself, or to try to be fascinating. I simply request you to care
about nothing--or seem to care about nothing--as everybody else does.'

'Do I ever say I care about anything?' asked Mr Merdle.

'Say? No! Nobody would attend to you if you did. But you show it.'

'Show what? What do I show?' demanded Mr Merdle hurriedly.

'I have already told you. You show that you carry your business cares
an projects about, instead of leaving them in the City, or wherever else
they belong to,' said Mrs Merdle. 'Or seeming to. Seeming would be quite
enough: I ask no more. Whereas you couldn't be more occupied with your
day's calculations and combinations than you habitually show yourself to
be, if you were a carpenter.'

'A carpenter!' repeated Mr Merdle, checking something like a groan.
'I shouldn't so much mind being a carpenter, Mrs Merdle.'

'And my complaint is,' pursued the lady, disregarding the low remark,
'that it is not the tone of Society, and that you ought to correct
it, Mr Merdle. If you have any doubt of my judgment, ask even Edmund
Sparkler.' The door of the room had opened, and Mrs Merdle now surveyed
the head of her son through her glass. 'Edmund; we want you here.'

Mr Sparkler, who had merely put in his head and looked round the room
without entering (as if he were searching the house for that young lady
with no nonsense about her), upon this followed up his head with his
body, and stood before them. To whom, in a few easy words adapted to his
capacity, Mrs Merdle stated the question at issue.

The young gentleman, after anxiously feeling his shirt-collar as if it
were his pulse and he were hypochondriacal, observed, 'That he had heard
it noticed by fellers.'

'Edmund Sparkler has heard it noticed,' said Mrs Merdle, with languid
triumph. 'Why, no doubt everybody has heard it noticed!' Which in truth
was no unreasonable inference; seeing that Mr Sparkler would probably be
the last person, in any assemblage of the human species, to receive an
impression from anything that passed in his presence.

'And Edmund Sparkler will tell you, I dare say,' said Mrs Merdle, waving
her favourite hand towards her husband, 'how he has heard it noticed.'

'I couldn't,' said Mr Sparkler, after feeling his pulse as before,
'couldn't undertake to say what led to it--'cause memory desperate
loose. But being in company with the brother of a doosed fine gal--well
educated too--with no biggodd nonsense about her--at the period alluded
to--'

'There! Never mind the sister,' remarked Mrs Merdle, a little
impatiently. 'What did the brother say?'

'Didn't say a word, ma'am,' answered Mr Sparkler. 'As silent a feller as
myself. Equally hard up for a remark.'

'Somebody said something,' returned Mrs Merdle. 'Never mind who it was.'

('Assure you I don't in the least,' said Mr Sparkler.)

'But tell us what it was.'

Mr Sparkler referred to his pulse again, and put himself through some
severe mental discipline before he replied:

'Fellers referring to my Governor--expression not my own--occasionally
compliment my Governor in a very handsome way on being immensely rich
and knowing--perfect phenomenon of Buyer and Banker and that--but say
the Shop sits heavily on him. Say he carried the Shop about, on his back
rather--like Jew clothesmen with too much business.'

'Which,' said Mrs Merdle, rising, with her floating drapery about her,
'is exactly my complaint. Edmund, give me your arm up-stairs.'

Mr Merdle, left alone to meditate on a better conformation of himself to
Society, looked out of nine windows in succession, and appeared to
see nine wastes of space. When he had thus entertained himself he went
down-stairs, and looked intently at all the carpets on the ground-floor;
and then came up-stairs again, and looked intently at all the carpets
on the first-floor; as if they were gloomy depths, in unison with his
oppressed soul. Through all the rooms he wandered, as he always did,
like the last person on earth who had any business to approach them. Let
Mrs Merdle announce, with all her might, that she was at Home ever
so many nights in a season, she could not announce more widely and
unmistakably than Mr Merdle did that he was never at home.

At last he met the chief butler, the sight of which splendid retainer
always finished him. Extinguished by this great creature, he sneaked
to his dressing-room, and there remained shut up until he rode out to
dinner, with Mrs Merdle, in her own handsome chariot. At dinner, he was
envied and flattered as a being of might, was Treasuried, Barred, and
Bishoped, as much as he would; and an hour after midnight came home
alone, and being instantly put out again in his own hall, like a
rushlight, by the chief butler, went sighing to bed.




CHAPTER 34. A Shoal of Barnacles


Mr Henry Gowan and the dog were established frequenters of the cottage,
and the day was fixed for the wedding. There was to be a convocation of
Barnacles on the occasion, in order that that very high and very large
family might shed as much lustre on the marriage as so dim an event was
capable of receiving.

To have got the whole Barnacle family together would have been
impossible for two reasons. Firstly, because no building could have held
all the members and connections of that illustrious house. Secondly,
because wherever there was a square yard of ground in British occupation
under the sun or moon, with a public post upon it, sticking to that post
was a Barnacle. No intrepid navigator could plant a flag-staff upon any
spot of earth, and take possession of it in the British name, but
to that spot of earth, so soon as the discovery was known, the
Circumlocution Office sent out a Barnacle and a despatch-box. Thus the
Barnacles were all over the world, in every direction--despatch-boxing
the compass.

But, while the so-potent art of Prospero himself would have failed in
summoning the Barnacles from every speck of ocean and dry land on
which there was nothing (except mischief) to be done and anything to be
pocketed, it was perfectly feasible to assemble a good many Barnacles.
This Mrs Gowan applied herself to do; calling on Mr Meagles frequently
with new additions to the list, and holding conferences with that
gentleman when he was not engaged (as he generally was at this period)
in examining and paying the debts of his future son-in-law, in the
apartment of scales and scoop.

One marriage guest there was, in reference to whose presence Mr Meagles
felt a nearer interest and concern than in the attendance of the most
elevated Barnacle expected; though he was far from insensible of the
honour of having such company. This guest was Clennam. But Clennam had
made a promise he held sacred, among the trees that summer night, and,
in the chivalry of his heart, regarded it as binding him to many implied
obligations. In forgetfulness of himself, and delicate service to her on
all occasions, he was never to fail; to begin it, he answered Mr Meagles
cheerfully, 'I shall come, of course.'

His partner, Daniel Doyce, was something of a stumbling-block in Mr
Meagles's way, the worthy gentleman being not at all clear in his own
anxious mind but that the mingling of Daniel with official Barnacleism
might produce some explosive combination, even at a marriage breakfast.
The national offender, however, lightened him of his uneasiness by
coming down to Twickenham to represent that he begged, with the freedom
of an old friend, and as a favour to one, that he might not be invited.
'For,' said he, 'as my business with this set of gentlemen was to do a
public duty and a public service, and as their business with me was to
prevent it by wearing my soul out, I think we had better not eat and
drink together with a show of being of one mind.' Mr Meagles was much
amused by his friend's oddity; and patronised him with a more protecting
air of allowance than usual, when he rejoined: 'Well, well, Dan, you
shall have your own crotchety way.'

To Mr Henry Gowan, as the time approached, Clennam tried to convey
by all quiet and unpretending means, that he was frankly and
disinterestedly desirous of tendering him any friendship he would
accept. Mr Gowan treated him in return with his usual ease, and with his
usual show of confidence, which was no confidence at all.

'You see, Clennam,' he happened to remark in the course of conversation
one day, when they were walking near the Cottage within a week of the
marriage, 'I am a disappointed man. That you know already.'

'Upon my word,' said Clennam, a little embarrassed, 'I scarcely know
how.'

'Why,' returned Gowan, 'I belong to a clan, or a clique, or a family, or
a connection, or whatever you like to call it, that might have provided
for me in any one of fifty ways, and that took it into its head not to
do it at all. So here I am, a poor devil of an artist.'

Clennam was beginning, 'But on the other hand--' when Gowan took him up.

'Yes, yes, I know. I have the good fortune of being beloved by a
beautiful and charming girl whom I love with all my heart.'

('Is there much of it?' Clennam thought. And as he thought it, felt
ashamed of himself.)

'And of finding a father-in-law who is a capital fellow and a liberal
good old boy. Still, I had other prospects washed and combed into my
childish head when it was washed and combed for me, and I took them to
a public school when I washed and combed it for myself, and I am here
without them, and thus I am a disappointed man.'

Clennam thought (and as he thought it, again felt ashamed of himself),
was this notion of being disappointed in life, an assertion of station
which the bridegroom brought into the family as his property, having
already carried it detrimentally into his pursuit? And was it a hopeful
or a promising thing anywhere?

'Not bitterly disappointed, I think,' he said aloud.

'Hang it, no; not bitterly,' laughed Gowan. 'My people are not worth
that--though they are charming fellows, and I have the greatest
affection for them. Besides, it's pleasant to show them that I can do
without them, and that they may all go to the Devil. And besides, again,
most men are disappointed in life, somehow or other, and influenced by
their disappointment. But it's a dear good world, and I love it!'

'It lies fair before you now,' said Arthur.

'Fair as this summer river,' cried the other, with enthusiasm, 'and by
Jove I glow with admiration of it, and with ardour to run a race in it.
