declines to give a French one. The rich and beautiful wardrobe purchased
by these agents, in the course of a few weeks made its way through the
intervening country, bristling with custom-houses, garrisoned by an
immense army of shabby mendicants in uniform who incessantly repeated
the Beggar's Petition over it, as if every individual warrior among them
were the ancient Belisarius: and of whom there were so many Legions,
that unless the Courier had expended just one bushel and a half of
silver money relieving their distresses, they would have worn the
wardrobe out before it got to Rome, by turning it over and over. Through
all such dangers, however, it was triumphantly brought, inch by inch,
and arrived at its journey's end in fine condition.

There it was exhibited to select companies of female viewers, in whose
gentle bosoms it awakened implacable feelings. Concurrently, active
preparations were made for the day on which some of its treasures were
to be publicly displayed. Cards of breakfast-invitation were sent out
to half the English in the city of Romulus; the other half made
arrangements to be under arms, as criticising volunteers, at various
outer points of the solemnity. The most high and illustrious English
Signor Edgardo Dorrit, came post through the deep mud and ruts (from
forming a surface under the improving Neapolitan nobility), to grace
the occasion. The best hotel and all its culinary myrmidons, were set to
work to prepare the feast. The drafts of Mr Dorrit almost constituted a
run on the Torlonia Bank. The British Consul hadn't had such a marriage
in the whole of his Consularity.

The day came, and the She-Wolf in the Capitol might have snarled with
envy to see how the Island Savages contrived these things now-a-days.
The murderous-headed statues of the wicked Emperors of the Soldiery,
whom sculptors had not been able to flatter out of their villainous
hideousness, might have come off their pedestals to run away with the
Bride. The choked old fountain, where erst the gladiators washed, might
have leaped into life again to honour the ceremony. The Temple of
Vesta might have sprung up anew from its ruins, expressly to lend its
countenance to the occasion. Might have done; but did not. Like sentient
things--even like the lords and ladies of creation sometimes--might
have done much, but did nothing. The celebration went off with admirable
pomp; monks in black robes, white robes, and russet robes stopped to
look after the carriages; wandering peasants in fleeces of sheep, begged
and piped under the house-windows; the English volunteers defiled; the
day wore on to the hour of vespers; the festival wore away; the thousand
churches rang their bells without any reference to it; and St Peter
denied that he had anything to do with it.

But by that time the Bride was near the end of the first day's journey
towards Florence. It was the peculiarity of the nuptials that they
were all Bride. Nobody noticed the Bridegroom. Nobody noticed the first
Bridesmaid. Few could have seen Little Dorrit (who held that post) for
the glare, even supposing many to have sought her. So, the Bride had
mounted into her handsome chariot, incidentally accompanied by the
Bridegroom; and after rolling for a few minutes smoothly over a fair
pavement, had begun to jolt through a Slough of Despond, and through a
long, long avenue of wrack and ruin. Other nuptial carriages are said to
have gone the same road, before and since.

If Little Dorrit found herself left a little lonely and a little low
that night, nothing would have done so much against her feeling of
depression as the being able to sit at work by her father, as in the old
time, and help him to his supper and his rest. But that was not to be
thought of now, when they sat in the state-equipage with Mrs General on
the coach-box. And as to supper! If Mr Dorrit had wanted supper, there
was an Italian cook and there was a Swiss confectioner, who must
have put on caps as high as the Pope's Mitre, and have performed the
mysteries of Alchemists in a copper-saucepaned laboratory below, before
he could have got it.

He was sententious and didactic that night. If he had been simply
loving, he would have done Little Dorrit more good; but she accepted him
as he was--when had she not accepted him as he was!--and made the most
and best of him. Mrs General at length retired. Her retirement for the
night was always her frostiest ceremony, as if she felt it necessary
that the human imagination should be chilled into stone to prevent
its following her. When she had gone through her rigid preliminaries,
amounting to a sort of genteel platoon-exercise, she withdrew. Little
Dorrit then put her arm round her father's neck, to bid him good night.

'Amy, my dear,' said Mr Dorrit, taking her by the hand, 'this is the
close of a day, that has--ha--greatly impressed and gratified me.'

'A little tired you, dear, too?'

'No,' said Mr Dorrit, 'no: I am not sensible of fatigue when it arises
from an occasion so--hum--replete with gratification of the purest
kind.'

Little Dorrit was glad to find him in such heart, and smiled from her
own heart.

'My dear,' he continued, 'this is an occasion--ha--teeming with a good
example. With a good example, my favourite and attached child--hum--to
you.'

Little Dorrit, fluttered by his words, did not know what to say, though
he stopped as if he expected her to say something.

'Amy,' he resumed; 'your dear sister, our Fanny, has contracted
ha hum--a marriage, eminently calculated to extend the basis of
our--ha--connection, and to--hum--consolidate our social relations. My
love, I trust that the time is not far distant when some--ha--eligible
partner may be found for you.'

'Oh no! Let me stay with you. I beg and pray that I may stay with you! I
want nothing but to stay and take care of you!'

She said it like one in sudden alarm.

'Nay, Amy, Amy,' said Mr Dorrit. 'This is weak and foolish, weak
and foolish. You have a--ha--responsibility imposed upon you by your
position. It is to develop that position, and be--hum--worthy of that
position. As to taking care of me; I can--ha--take care of myself.
Or,' he added after a moment, 'if I should need to be taken care of,
I--hum--can, with the--ha--blessing of Providence, be taken care of,
I--ha hum--I cannot, my dear child, think of engrossing, and--ha--as it
were, sacrificing you.'

O what a time of day at which to begin that profession of self-denial;
at which to make it, with an air of taking credit for it; at which to
believe it, if such a thing could be!

'Don't speak, Amy. I positively say I cannot do it. I--ha--must not do
it. My--hum--conscience would not allow it. I therefore, my love, take
the opportunity afforded by this gratifying and impressive occasion
of--ha--solemnly remarking, that it is now a cherished wish and purpose
of mine to see you--ha--eligibly (I repeat eligibly) married.'

'Oh no, dear! Pray!'

'Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I am well persuaded that if the topic were
referred to any person of superior social knowledge, of superior
delicacy and sense--let us say, for instance, to--ha--Mrs General--that
there would not be two opinions as to the--hum--affectionate character
and propriety of my sentiments. But, as I know your loving and dutiful
nature from--hum--from experience, I am quite satisfied that it is
necessary to say no more. I have--hum--no husband to propose at
present, my dear: I have not even one in view. I merely wish that we
should--ha--understand each other. Hum. Good night, my dear and sole
remaining daughter. Good night. God bless you!'

If the thought ever entered Little Dorrit's head that night, that he
could give her up lightly now in his prosperity, and when he had it in
his mind to replace her with a second wife, she drove it away. Faithful
to him still, as in the worst times through which she had borne him
single-handed, she drove the thought away; and entertained no harder
reflection, in her tearful unrest, than that he now saw everything
through their wealth, and through the care he always had upon him that
they should continue rich, and grow richer.

They sat in their equipage of state, with Mrs General on the box, for
three weeks longer, and then he started for Florence to join Fanny.
Little Dorrit would have been glad to bear him company so far, only for
the sake of her own love, and then to have turned back alone, thinking
of dear England. But, though the Courier had gone on with the Bride, the
Valet was next in the line; and the succession would not have come to
her, as long as any one could be got for money.

Mrs General took life easily--as easily, that is, as she could
take anything--when the Roman establishment remained in their sole
occupation; and Little Dorrit would often ride out in a hired carriage
that was left them, and alight alone and wander among the ruins of old
Rome. The ruins of the vast old Amphitheatre, of the old Temples, of the
old commemorative Arches, of the old trodden highways, of the old
tombs, besides being what they were, to her were ruins of the old
Marshalsea--ruins of her own old life--ruins of the faces and forms
that of old peopled it--ruins of its loves, hopes, cares, and joys. Two
ruined spheres of action and suffering were before the solitary girl
often sitting on some broken fragment; and in the lonely places, under
the blue sky, she saw them both together.

Up, then, would come Mrs General; taking all the colour out of
everything, as Nature and Art had taken it out of herself; writing
Prunes and Prism, in Mr Eustace's text, wherever she could lay a hand;
looking everywhere for Mr Eustace and company, and seeing nothing else;
scratching up the driest little bones of antiquity, and bolting them
whole without any human visitings--like a Ghoule in gloves.




CHAPTER 16. Getting on


The newly married pair, on their arrival in Harley Street, Cavendish
Square, London, were received by the Chief Butler. That great man was
not interested in them, but on the whole endured them. People must
continue to be married and given in marriage, or Chief Butlers would not
be wanted. As nations are made to be taxed, so families are made to
be butlered. The Chief Butler, no doubt, reflected that the course of
nature required the wealthy population to be kept up, on his account.

He therefore condescended to look at the carriage from the Hall-door
without frowning at it, and said, in a very handsome way, to one of
his men, 'Thomas, help with the luggage.' He even escorted the Bride
up-stairs into Mr Merdle's presence; but this must be considered as an
act of homage to the sex (of which he was an admirer, being notoriously
captivated by the charms of a certain Duchess), and not as a committal
of himself with the family.

Mr Merdle was slinking about the hearthrug, waiting to welcome Mrs
Sparkler. His hand seemed to retreat up his sleeve as he advanced to
do so, and he gave her such a superfluity of coat-cuff that it was like
being received by the popular conception of Guy Fawkes. When he put his
lips to hers, besides, he took himself into custody by the wrists, and
backed himself among the ottomans and chairs and tables as if he were
his own Police officer, saying to himself, 'Now, none of that! Come!
I've got you, you know, and you go quietly along with me!'

Mrs Sparkler, installed in the rooms of state--the innermost sanctuary
of down, silk, chintz, and fine linen--felt that so far her triumph was
good, and her way made, step by step. On the day before her marriage,
she had bestowed on Mrs Merdle's maid with an air of gracious
indifference, in Mrs Merdle's presence, a trifling little keepsake
(bracelet, bonnet, and two dresses, all new) about four times as
valuable as the present formerly made by Mrs Merdle to her. She was now
established in Mrs Merdle's own rooms, to which some extra touches had
been given to render them more worthy of her occupation. In her mind's
eye, as she lounged there, surrounded by every luxurious accessory that
wealth could obtain or invention devise, she saw the fair bosom that
beat in unison with the exultation of her thoughts, competing with the
bosom that had been famous so long, outshining it, and deposing it.
Happy? Fanny must have been happy. No more wishing one's self dead now.

The Courier had not approved of Mr Dorrit's staying in the house of
a friend, and had preferred to take him to an hotel in Brook Street,
Grosvenor Square. Mr Merdle ordered his carriage to be ready early
in the morning that he might wait upon Mr Dorrit immediately after
breakfast.

Bright the carriage looked, sleek the horses looked, gleaming the
harness looked, luscious and lasting the liveries looked. A rich,
responsible turn-out. An equipage for a Merdle. Early people looked
after it as it rattled along the streets, and said, with awe in their
breath, 'There he goes!'

There he went, until Brook Street stopped him. Then, forth from its
magnificent case came the jewel; not lustrous in itself, but quite the
contrary.

Commotion in the office of the hotel. Merdle! The landlord, though
a gentleman of a haughty spirit who had just driven a pair of
thorough-bred horses into town, turned out to show him up-stairs.
The clerks and servants cut him off by back-passages, and were found
accidentally hovering in doorways and angles, that they might look upon
him. Merdle! O ye sun, moon, and stars, the great man! The rich man, who
had in a manner revised the New Testament, and already entered into the
kingdom of Heaven. The man who could have any one he chose to dine with
him, and who had made the money! As he went up the stairs, people were
already posted on the lower stairs, that his shadow might fall upon them
when he came down. So were the sick brought out and laid in the track of
the Apostle--who had _not_ got into the good society, and had _not_ made
the money.

Mr Dorrit, dressing-gowned and newspapered, was at his breakfast. The
Courier, with agitation in his voice, announced 'Miss Mairdale!' Mr
Dorrit's overwrought heart bounded as he leaped up.

'Mr Merdle, this is--ha--indeed an honour. Permit me to express
the--hum--sense, the high sense, I entertain of this--ha hum--highly
gratifying act of attention. I am well aware, sir, of the many demands
upon your time, and its--ha--enormous value,' Mr Dorrit could not
say enormous roundly enough for his own satisfaction. 'That you
should--ha--at this early hour, bestow any of your priceless time upon
me, is--ha--a compliment that I acknowledge with the greatest esteem.'
Mr Dorrit positively trembled in addressing the great man.

Mr Merdle uttered, in his subdued, inward, hesitating voice, a few
sounds that were to no purpose whatever; and finally said, 'I am glad to
see you, sir.'

'You are very kind,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Truly kind.' By this time the
visitor was seated, and was passing his great hand over his exhausted
forehead. 'You are well, I hope, Mr Merdle?'

'I am as well as I--yes, I am as well as I usually am,' said Mr Merdle.

'Your occupations must be immense.'

'Tolerably so. But--Oh dear no, there's not much the matter with _me_,'
said Mr Merdle, looking round the room.

'A little dyspeptic?' Mr Dorrit hinted.

'Very likely. But I--Oh, I am well enough,' said Mr Merdle.

There were black traces on his lips where they met, as if a little train
of gunpowder had been fired there; and he looked like a man who, if his
natural temperament had been quicker, would have been very feverish that
morning. This, and his heavy way of passing his hand over his forehead,
had prompted Mr Dorrit's solicitous inquiries.

'Mrs Merdle,' Mr Dorrit insinuatingly pursued, 'I left, as you will be
prepared to hear, the--ha--observed of all observers, the--hum--admired
of all admirers, the leading fascination and charm of Society in Rome.
She was looking wonderfully well when I quitted it.'

'Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle, 'is generally considered a very attractive
woman. And she is, no doubt. I am sensible of her being so.'

'Who can be otherwise?' responded Mr Dorrit.

Mr Merdle turned his tongue in his closed mouth--it seemed rather a
stiff and unmanageable tongue--moistened his lips, passed his hand over
his forehead again, and looked all round the room again, principally
under the chairs.

'But,' he said, looking Mr Dorrit in the face for the first time, and
immediately afterwards dropping his eyes to the buttons of Mr Dorrit's
waistcoat; 'if we speak of attractions, your daughter ought to be the
subject of our conversation. She is extremely beautiful. Both in face
and figure, she is quite uncommon. When the young people arrived last
night, I was really surprised to see such charms.'

Mr Dorrit's gratification was such that he said--ha--he could not
refrain from telling Mr Merdle verbally, as he had already done by
letter, what honour and happiness he felt in this union of their
families. And he offered his hand. Mr Merdle looked at the hand for a
little while, took it on his for a moment as if his were a yellow salver
or fish-slice, and then returned it to Mr Dorrit.

'I thought I would drive round the first thing,' said Mr Merdle, 'to
offer my services, in case I can do anything for you; and to say that
I hope you will at least do me the honour of dining with me to-day, and
every day when you are not better engaged during your stay in town.'

Mr Dorrit was enraptured by these attentions.

'Do you stay long, sir?'

'I have not at present the intention,' said Mr Dorrit,
'of--ha--exceeding a fortnight.'

'That's a very short stay, after so long a journey,' returned Mr Merdle.

'Hum. Yes,' said Mr Dorrit. 'But the truth is--ha--my dear Mr Merdle,
that I find a foreign life so well suited to my health and taste, that
I--hum--have but two objects in my present visit to London. First,
the--ha--the distinguished happiness and--ha--privilege which I now
enjoy and appreciate; secondly, the arrangement--hum--the laying out,
that is to say, in the best way, of--ha, hum--my money.'

'Well, sir,' said Mr Merdle, after turning his tongue again, 'if I can
be of any use to you in that respect, you may command me.'

Mr Dorrit's speech had had more hesitation in it than usual, as he
approached the ticklish topic, for he was not perfectly clear how so
exalted a potentate might take it. He had doubts whether reference to
any individual capital, or fortune, might not seem a wretchedly retail
affair to so wholesale a dealer. Greatly relieved by Mr Merdle's
affable offer of assistance, he caught at it directly, and heaped
acknowledgments upon him.

'I scarcely--ha--dared,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I assure you, to hope for
so--hum--vast an advantage as your direct advice and assistance. Though
of course I should, under any circumstances, like the--ha, hum--rest of
the civilised world, have followed in Mr Merdle's train.'

'You know we may almost say we are related, sir,' said Mr Merdle,
curiously interested in the pattern of the carpet, 'and, therefore, you
may consider me at your service.'

'Ha. Very handsome, indeed!' cried Mr Dorrit. 'Ha. Most handsome!'

'It would not,' said Mr Merdle, 'be at the present moment easy for
what I may call a mere outsider to come into any of the good things--of
course I speak of my own good things--'

'Of course, of course!' cried Mr Dorrit, in a tone implying that there
were no other good things.

'--Unless at a high price. At what we are accustomed to term a very long
figure.'

Mr Dorrit laughed in the buoyancy of his spirit. Ha, ha, ha! Long
figure. Good. Ha. Very expressive to be sure!

'However,' said Mr Merdle, 'I do generally retain in my own hands the
power of exercising some preference--people in general would be pleased
to call it favour--as a sort of compliment for my care and trouble.'

'And public spirit and genius,' Mr Dorrit suggested.

Mr Merdle, with a dry, swallowing action, seemed to dispose of those
qualities like a bolus; then added, 'As a sort of return for it. I will
see, if you please, how I can exert this limited power (for people are
jealous, and it is limited), to your advantage.'

'You are very good,' replied Mr Dorrit. 'You are _very_ good.'

'Of course,' said Mr Merdle, 'there must be the strictest integrity
and uprightness in these transactions; there must be the purest faith
between man and man; there must be unimpeached and unimpeachable
confidence; or business could not be carried on.'

Mr Dorrit hailed these generous sentiments with fervour.

'Therefore,' said Mr Merdle, 'I can only give you a preference to a
certain extent.'

'I perceive. To a defined extent,' observed Mr Dorrit.

'Defined extent. And perfectly above-board. As to my advice, however,'
said Mr Merdle, 'that is another matter. That, such as it is--'

Oh! Such as it was! (Mr Dorrit could not bear the faintest appearance of
its being depreciated, even by Mr Merdle himself.)

'--That, there is nothing in the bonds of spotless honour between myself
and my fellow-man to prevent my parting with, if I choose. And that,'
said Mr Merdle, now deeply intent upon a dust-cart that was passing the
windows, 'shall be at your command whenever you think proper.'

New acknowledgments from Mr Dorrit. New passages of Mr Merdle's hand
over his forehead. Calm and silence. Contemplation of Mr Dorrit's
waistcoat buttons by Mr Merdle.

'My time being rather precious,' said Mr Merdle, suddenly getting up,
as if he had been waiting in the interval for his legs and they had just
come, 'I must be moving towards the City. Can I take you anywhere, sir?
I shall be happy to set you down, or send you on. My carriage is at your
disposal.'

Mr Dorrit bethought himself that he had business at his banker's. His
banker's was in the City. That was fortunate; Mr Merdle would take
him into the City. But, surely, he might not detain Mr Merdle while he
assumed his coat? Yes, he might and must; Mr Merdle insisted on it. So
Mr Dorrit, retiring into the next room, put himself under the hands of
his valet, and in five minutes came back glorious.

Then said Mr Merdle, 'Allow me, sir. Take my arm!' Then leaning on
Mr Merdle's arm, did Mr Dorrit descend the staircase, seeing the
worshippers on the steps, and feeling that the light of Mr Merdle shone
by reflection in himself. Then the carriage, and the ride into the
City; and the people who looked at them; and the hats that flew off grey
heads; and the general bowing and crouching before this wonderful mortal
the like of which prostration of spirit was not to be seen--no, by
high Heaven, no! It may be worth thinking of by Fawners of all
denominations--in Westminster Abbey and Saint Paul's Cathedral put
together, on any Sunday in the year. It was a rapturous dream to Mr
Dorrit to find himself set aloft in this public car of triumph, making a
magnificent progress to that befitting destination, the golden Street of
the Lombards.

There Mr Merdle insisted on alighting and going his way a-foot, and
leaving his poor equipage at Mr Dorrit's disposition. So the dream
increased in rapture when Mr Dorrit came out of the bank alone, and
people looked at _him_ in default of Mr Merdle, and when, with the ears of
his mind, he heard the frequent exclamation as he rolled glibly along,
'A wonderful man to be Mr Merdle's friend!'

At dinner that day, although the occasion was not foreseen and provided
for, a brilliant company of such as are not made of the dust of the
earth, but of some superior article for the present unknown, shed
their lustrous benediction upon Mr Dorrit's daughter's marriage. And Mr
Dorrit's daughter that day began, in earnest, her competition with that
woman not present; and began it so well that Mr Dorrit could all but
have taken his affidavit, if required, that Mrs Sparkler had all her
life been lying at full length in the lap of luxury, and had never heard
of such a rough word in the English tongue as Marshalsea.

Next day, and the day after, and every day, all graced by more dinner
company, cards descended on Mr Dorrit like theatrical snow. As the
friend and relative by marriage of the illustrious Merdle, Bar, Bishop,
Treasury, Chorus, Everybody, wanted to make or improve Mr Dorrit's
acquaintance. In Mr Merdle's heap of offices in the City, when Mr Dorrit
appeared at any of them on his business taking him Eastward (which it
frequently did, for it throve amazingly), the name of Dorrit was always
a passport to the great presence of Merdle. So the dream increased in
rapture every hour, as Mr Dorrit felt increasingly sensible that this
connection had brought him forward indeed.

Only one thing sat otherwise than auriferously, and at the same time
lightly, on Mr Dorrit's mind. It was the Chief Butler. That stupendous
character looked at him, in the course of his official looking at the
dinners, in a manner that Mr Dorrit considered questionable. He looked
at him, as he passed through the hall and up the staircase, going to
dinner, with a glazed fixedness that Mr Dorrit did not like. Seated
at table in the act of drinking, Mr Dorrit still saw him through his
wine-glass, regarding him with a cold and ghostly eye. It misgave him
that the Chief Butler must have known a Collegian, and must have seen
him in the College--perhaps had been presented to him. He looked as
closely at the Chief Butler as such a man could be looked at, and yet
he did not recall that he had ever seen him elsewhere. Ultimately he was
inclined to think that there was no reverence in the man, no sentiment
in the great creature. But he was not relieved by that; for, let him
think what he would, the Chief Butler had him in his supercilious eye,
even when that eye was on the plate and other table-garniture; and he
never let him out of it. To hint to him that this confinement in his eye
was disagreeable, or to ask him what he meant, was an act too daring to
venture upon; his severity with his employers and their visitors being
terrific, and he never permitting himself to be approached with the
slightest liberty.




CHAPTER 17. Missing


The term of Mr Dorrit's visit was within two days of being out, and he
was about to dress for another inspection by the Chief Butler (whose
victims were always dressed expressly for him), when one of the servants
of the hotel presented himself bearing a card. Mr Dorrit, taking it,
read:

'Mrs Finching.'

The servant waited in speechless deference.

'Man, man,' said Mr Dorrit, turning upon him with grievous indignation,
'explain your motive in bringing me this ridiculous name. I am wholly
unacquainted with it. Finching, sir?' said Mr Dorrit, perhaps avenging
himself on the Chief Butler by Substitute. 'Ha! What do you mean by
Finching?'

The man, man, seemed to mean Flinching as much as anything else, for
he backed away from Mr Dorrit's severe regard, as he replied, 'A lady,
sir.'

'I know no such lady, sir,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Take this card away. I know
no Finching of either sex.'

'Ask your pardon, sir. The lady said she was aware she might be unknown
by name. But she begged me to say, sir, that she had formerly the honour
of being acquainted with Miss Dorrit. The lady said, sir, the youngest
Miss Dorrit.'

Mr Dorrit knitted his brows and rejoined, after a moment or two, 'Inform
Mrs Finching, sir,' emphasising the name as if the innocent man were
solely responsible for it, 'that she can come up.'

He had reflected, in his momentary pause, that unless she were admitted
she might leave some message, or might say something below, having
a disgraceful reference to that former state of existence. Hence the
concession, and hence the appearance of Flora, piloted in by the man,
man.

'I have not the pleasure,' said Mr Dorrit, standing with the card in his
hand, and with an air which imported that it would scarcely have been a
first-class pleasure if he had had it, 'of knowing either this name, or
yourself, madam. Place a chair, sir.'

The responsible man, with a start, obeyed, and went out on tiptoe.
Flora, putting aside her veil with a bashful tremor upon her, proceeded
to introduce herself. At the same time a singular combination of
perfumes was diffused through the room, as if some brandy had been put
by mistake in a lavender-water bottle, or as if some lavender-water had
been put by mistake in a brandy-bottle.

'I beg Mr Dorrit to offer a thousand apologies and indeed they would
be far too few for such an intrusion which I know must appear extremely
bold in a lady and alone too, but I thought it best upon the whole
however difficult and even apparently improper though Mr F.'s Aunt would
have willingly accompanied me and as a character of great force and
spirit would probably have struck one possessed of such a knowledge of
life as no doubt with so many changes must have been acquired, for Mr F.
himself said frequently that although well educated in the neighbourhood
of Blackheath at as high as eighty guineas which is a good deal for
parents and the plate kept back too on going away but that is more a
meanness than its value that he had learnt more in his first years as a
commercial traveller with a large commission on the sale of an article
that nobody would hear of much less buy which preceded the wine trade
a long time than in the whole six years in that academy conducted by a
college Bachelor, though why a Bachelor more clever than a married man I
do not see and never did but pray excuse me that is not the point.'

Mr Dorrit stood rooted to the carpet, a statue of mystification.

'I must openly admit that I have no pretensions,' said Flora, 'but
having known the dear little thing which under altered circumstances
appears a liberty but is not so intended and Goodness knows there was no
favour in half-a-crown a-day to such a needle as herself but quite the
other way and as to anything lowering in it far from it the labourer is
worthy of his hire and I am sure I only wish he got it oftener and more
animal food and less rheumatism in the back and legs poor soul.'

'Madam,' said Mr Dorrit, recovering his breath by a great effort, as the
relict of the late Mr Finching stopped to take hers; 'madam,' said Mr
Dorrit, very red in the face, 'if I understand you to refer to--ha--to
anything in the antecedents of--hum--a daughter of mine, involving--ha
hum--daily compensation, madam, I beg to observe that the--ha--fact,
assuming it--ha--to be fact, never was within my knowledge. Hum. I
should not have permitted it. Ha. Never! Never!'

'Unnecessary to pursue the subject,' returned Flora, 'and would not have
mentioned it on any account except as supposing it a favourable and only
letter of introduction but as to being fact no doubt whatever and you
may set your mind at rest for the very dress I have on now can prove it
and sweetly made though there is no denying that it would tell better on
a better figure for my own is much too fat though how to bring it down I
know not, pray excuse me I am roving off again.'

Mr Dorrit backed to his chair in a stony way, and seated himself, as
Flora gave him a softening look and played with her parasol.

'The dear little thing,' said Flora, 'having gone off perfectly limp
and white and cold in my own house or at least papa's for though not
a freehold still a long lease at a peppercorn on the morning when
Arthur--foolish habit of our youthful days and Mr Clennam far more
adapted to existing circumstances particularly addressing a stranger and
that stranger a gentleman in an elevated station--communicated the glad
tidings imparted by a person of name of Pancks emboldens me.'

At the mention of these two names, Mr Dorrit frowned, stared, frowned
again, hesitated with his fingers at his lips, as he had hesitated long
ago, and said, 'Do me the favour to--ha--state your pleasure, madam.'

'Mr Dorrit,' said Flora, 'you are very kind in giving me permission and
highly natural it seems to me that you should be kind for though more
stately I perceive a likeness filled out of course but a likeness still,
the object of my intruding is my own without the slightest consultation
with any human being and most decidedly not with Arthur--pray excuse me
Doyce and Clennam I don't know what I am saying Mr Clennam solus--for to
put that individual linked by a golden chain to a purple time when all
was ethereal out of any anxiety would be worth to me the ransom of a
monarch not that I have the least idea how much that would come to but
using it as the total of all I have in the world and more.'

Mr Dorrit, without greatly regarding the earnestness of these latter
words, repeated, 'State your pleasure, madam.'

'It's not likely I well know,' said Flora, 'but it's possible and being
possible when I had the gratification of reading in the papers that you
had arrived from Italy and were going back I made up my mind to try it
for you might come across him or hear something of him and if so what a
blessing and relief to all!'

'Allow me to ask, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, with his ideas in wild
confusion, 'to whom--ha--TO WHOM,' he repeated it with a raised voice in
mere desperation, 'you at present allude?'

'To the foreigner from Italy who disappeared in the City as no doubt you
have read in the papers equally with myself,' said Flora, 'not referring
to private sources by the name of Pancks from which one gathers what
dreadfully ill-natured things some people are wicked enough to whisper
most likely judging others by themselves and what the uneasiness
and indignation of Arthur--quite unable to overcome it Doyce and
Clennam--cannot fail to be.'

It happened, fortunately for the elucidation of any intelligible result,
that Mr Dorrit had heard or read nothing about the matter. This
caused Mrs Finching, with many apologies for being in great practical
difficulties as to finding the way to her pocket among the stripes of
her dress at length to produce a police handbill, setting forth that
a foreign gentleman of the name of Blandois, last from Venice, had
unaccountably disappeared on such a night in such a part of the city of
London; that he was known to have entered such a house, at such an hour;
that he was stated by the inmates of that house to have left it, about
so many minutes before midnight; and that he had never been beheld
since. This, with exact particulars of time and locality, and with
a good detailed description of the foreign gentleman who had so
mysteriously vanished, Mr Dorrit read at large.

'Blandois!' said Mr Dorrit. 'Venice! And this description! I know this
gentleman. He has been in my house. He is intimately acquainted with a
gentleman of good family (but in indifferent circumstances), of whom I
am a--hum--patron.'

'Then my humble and pressing entreaty is the more,' said Flora, 'that
in travelling back you will have the kindness to look for this foreign
gentleman along all the roads and up and down all the turnings and to
make inquiries for him at all the hotels and orange-trees and vineyards
and volcanoes and places for he must be somewhere and why doesn't he
come forward and say he's there and clear all parties up?'

'Pray, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, referring to the handbill again, 'who is
Clennam and Co.? Ha. I see the name mentioned here, in connection with
the occupation of the house which Monsieur Blandois was seen to
enter: who is Clennam and Co.? Is it the individual of whom I had
formerly--hum--some--ha--slight transitory knowledge, and to whom I
believe you have referred? Is it--ha--that person?'

'It's a very different person indeed,' replied Flora, 'with no limbs and
wheels instead and the grimmest of women though his mother.'

'Clennam and Co. a--hum--a mother!' exclaimed Mr Dorrit.

'And an old man besides,' said Flora.

Mr Dorrit looked as if he must immediately be driven out of his mind
by this account. Neither was it rendered more favourable to sanity by
Flora's dashing into a rapid analysis of Mr Flintwinch's cravat, and
describing him, without the lightest boundary line of separation between
his identity and Mrs Clennam's, as a rusty screw in gaiters. Which
compound of man and woman, no limbs, wheels, rusty screw, grimness, and
gaiters, so completely stupefied Mr Dorrit, that he was a spectacle to
be pitied.

'But I would not detain you one moment longer,' said Flora, upon whom
his condition wrought its effect, though she was quite unconscious of
having produced it, 'if you would have the goodness to give your promise
as a gentleman that both in going back to Italy and in Italy too you
would look for this Mr Blandois high and low and if you found or heard
of him make him come forward for the clearing of all parties.'

By that time Mr Dorrit had so far recovered from his bewilderment, as to
be able to say, in a tolerably connected manner, that he should consider
that his duty. Flora was delighted with her success, and rose to take
her leave.

'With a million thanks,' said she, 'and my address upon my card in case
of anything to be communicated personally, I will not send my love to
the dear little thing for it might not be acceptable, and indeed there
is no dear little thing left in the transformation so why do it but
both myself and Mr F.'s Aunt ever wish her well and lay no claim to any
favour on our side you may be sure of that but quite the other way for
what she undertook to do she did and that is more than a great many of
us do, not to say anything of her doing it as well as it could be
done and I myself am one of them for I have said ever since I began to
recover the blow of Mr F's death that I would learn the Organ of which
I am extremely fond but of which I am ashamed to say I do not yet know a
note, good evening!'

When Mr Dorrit, who attended her to the room-door, had had a little time
to collect his senses, he found that the interview had summoned back
discarded reminiscences which jarred with the Merdle dinner-table.
He wrote and sent off a brief note excusing himself for that day, and
ordered dinner presently in his own rooms at the hotel. He had another
reason for this. His time in London was very nearly out, and was
anticipated by engagements; his plans were made for returning; and he
thought it behoved his importance to pursue some direct inquiry into the
Blandois disappearance, and be in a condition to carry back to Mr
Henry Gowan the result of his own personal investigation. He therefore
resolved that he would take advantage of that evening's freedom to go
down to Clennam and Co.'s, easily to be found by the direction set forth
in the handbill; and see the place, and ask a question or two there
himself.

Having dined as plainly as the establishment and the Courier would let
him, and having taken a short sleep by the fire for his better recovery
from Mrs Finching, he set out in a hackney-cabriolet alone. The deep
bell of St Paul's was striking nine as he passed under the shadow of
Temple Bar, headless and forlorn in these degenerate days.

As he approached his destination through the by-streets and water-side
ways, that part of London seemed to him an uglier spot at such an hour
than he had ever supposed it to be. Many long years had passed since he
had seen it; he had never known much of it; and it wore a mysterious and
dismal aspect in his eyes. So powerfully was his imagination impressed
by it, that when his driver stopped, after having asked the way more
than once, and said to the best of his belief this was the gateway they
wanted, Mr Dorrit stood hesitating, with the coach-door in his hand,
half afraid of the dark look of the place.

Truly, it looked as gloomy that night as even it had ever looked. Two of
the handbills were posted on the entrance wall, one on either side, and
as the lamp flickered in the night air, shadows passed over them, not
unlike the shadows of fingers following the lines. A watch was evidently
kept upon the place. As Mr Dorrit paused, a man passed in from over the
way, and another man passed out from some dark corner within; and both
looked at him in passing, and both remained standing about.

As there was only one house in the enclosure, there was no room for
uncertainty, so he went up the steps of that house and knocked. There
was a dim light in two windows on the first-floor. The door gave back
a dreary, vacant sound, as though the house were empty; but it was not,
for a light was visible, and a step was audible, almost directly. They
both came to the door, and a chain grated, and a woman with her apron
thrown over her face and head stood in the aperture.

'Who is it?' said the woman.

Mr Dorrit, much amazed by this appearance, replied that he was from
Italy, and that he wished to ask a question relative to the missing
person, whom he knew.

'Hi!' cried the woman, raising a cracked voice. 'Jeremiah!'

Upon this, a dry old man appeared, whom Mr Dorrit thought he identified
by his gaiters, as the rusty screw. The woman was under apprehensions
of the dry old man, for she whisked her apron away as he approached, and
disclosed a pale affrighted face. 'Open the door, you fool,' said the
old man; 'and let the gentleman in.'

Mr Dorrit, not without a glance over his shoulder towards his driver and
the cabriolet, walked into the dim hall. 'Now, sir,' said Mr Flintwinch,
'you can ask anything here you think proper; there are no secrets here,
sir.'

Before a reply could be made, a strong stern voice, though a woman's,
called from above, 'Who is it?'

'Who is it?' returned Jeremiah. 'More inquiries. A gentleman from
Italy.'

'Bring him up here!'

Mr Flintwinch muttered, as if he deemed that unnecessary; but, turning
to Mr Dorrit, said, 'Mrs Clennam. She _will_ do as she likes. I'll show
you the way.' He then preceded Mr Dorrit up the blackened staircase;
that gentleman, not unnaturally looking behind him on the road, saw the
woman following, with her apron thrown over her head again in her former
ghastly manner.

Mrs Clennam had her books open on her little table. 'Oh!' said she
abruptly, as she eyed her visitor with a steady look. 'You are from
Italy, sir, are you. Well?'

Mr Dorrit was at a loss for any more distinct rejoinder at the moment
than 'Ha--well?'

'Where is this missing man? Have you come to give us information where
he is? I hope you have?'

'So far from it, I--hum--have come to seek information.'

'Unfortunately for us, there is none to be got here. Flintwinch, show
the gentleman the handbill. Give him several to take away. Hold the
light for him to read it.'

Mr Flintwinch did as he was directed, and Mr Dorrit read it through,
as if he had not previously seen it; glad enough of the opportunity of
collecting his presence of mind, which the air of the house and of the
people in it had a little disturbed. While his eyes were on the paper,
he felt that the eyes of Mr Flintwinch and of Mrs Clennam were on him.
He found, when he looked up, that this sensation was not a fanciful one.

'Now you know as much,' said Mrs Clennam, 'as we know, sir. Is Mr
Blandois a friend of yours?'

'No--a--hum--an acquaintance,' answered Mr Dorrit.

'You have no commission from him, perhaps?'

'I? Ha. Certainly not.'

The searching look turned gradually to the floor, after taking Mr
Flintwinch's face in its way. Mr Dorrit, discomfited by finding that
he was the questioned instead of the questioner, applied himself to the
reversal of that unexpected order of things.

'I am--ha--a gentleman of property, at present residing in Italy with my
family, my servants, and--hum--my rather large establishment. Being in
London for a short time on affairs connected with--ha--my estate,
and hearing of this strange disappearance, I wished to make myself
acquainted with the circumstances at first-hand, because there is--ha
hum--an English gentleman in Italy whom I shall no doubt see on my
return, who has been in habits of close and daily intimacy with Monsieur
Blandois. Mr Henry Gowan. You may know the name.'

'Never heard of it.'

Mrs Clennam said it, and Mr Flintwinch echoed it.

'Wishing to--ha--make the narrative coherent and consecutive to him,'
said Mr Dorrit, 'may I ask--say, three questions?'

'Thirty, if you choose.'

'Have you known Monsieur Blandois long?'

'Not a twelvemonth. Mr Flintwinch here, will refer to the books and tell
you when, and by whom at Paris he was introduced to us. If that,'
Mrs Clennam added, 'should be any satisfaction to you. It is poor
satisfaction to us.'

'Have you seen him often?'

'No. Twice. Once before, and--'

'That once,' suggested Mr Flintwinch.

'And that once.'

'Pray, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, with a growing fancy upon him as he
recovered his importance, that he was in some superior way in the
Commission of the Peace; 'pray, madam, may I inquire, for the greater
satisfaction of the gentleman whom I have the honour to--ha--retain, or
protect or let me say to--hum--know--to know--Was Monsieur Blandois here
on business on the night indicated in this present sheet?'

'On what he called business,' returned Mrs Clennam.

'Is--ha--excuse me--is its nature to be communicated?'

'No.'

It was evidently impracticable to pass the barrier of that reply.

'The question has been asked before,' said Mrs Clennam, 'and the answer
has been, No. We don't choose to publish our transactions, however
unimportant, to all the town. We say, No.'

'I mean, he took away no money with him, for example,' said Mr Dorrit.

'He took away none of ours, sir, and got none here.'

'I suppose,' observed Mr Dorrit, glancing from Mrs Clennam to Mr
Flintwinch, and from Mr Flintwinch to Mrs Clennam, 'you have no way of
accounting to yourself for this mystery?'

'Why do you suppose so?' rejoined Mrs Clennam.

Disconcerted by the cold and hard inquiry, Mr Dorrit was unable to
assign any reason for his supposing so.

'I account for it, sir,' she pursued after an awkward silence on Mr
Dorrit's part, 'by having no doubt that he is travelling somewhere, or
hiding somewhere.'

'Do you know--ha--why he should hide anywhere?'

'No.'

It was exactly the same No as before, and put another barrier up.

'You asked me if I accounted for the disappearance to myself,' Mrs
Clennam sternly reminded him, 'not if I accounted for it to you. I do
not pretend to account for it to you, sir. I understand it to be no more
my business to do that, than it is yours to require that.'

Mr Dorrit answered with an apologetic bend of his head. As he stepped
back, preparatory to saying he had no more to ask, he could not but
observe how gloomily and fixedly she sat with her eyes fastened on
the ground, and a certain air upon her of resolute waiting; also,
how exactly the self-same expression was reflected in Mr Flintwinch,
standing at a little distance from her chair, with his eyes also on the
ground, and his right hand softly rubbing his chin.

At that moment, Mistress Affery (of course, the woman with the apron)
dropped the candlestick she held, and cried out, 'There! O good Lord!
there it is again. Hark, Jeremiah! Now!'

If there were any sound at all, it was so slight that she must have
fallen into a confirmed habit of listening for sounds; but Mr Dorrit
believed he did hear a something, like the falling of dry leaves. The
woman's terror, for a very short space, seemed to touch the three; and
they all listened.

Mr Flintwinch was the first to stir. 'Affery, my woman,' said he,
sidling at her with his fists clenched, and his elbows quivering with
impatience to shake her, 'you are at your old tricks. You'll be walking
in your sleep next, my woman, and playing the whole round of your
distempered antics. You must have some physic. When I have shown this
gentleman out, I'll make you up such a comfortable dose, my woman; such
a comfortable dose!'

It did not appear altogether comfortable in expectation to Mistress
Affery; but Jeremiah, without further reference to his healing medicine,
took another candle from Mrs Clennam's table, and said, 'Now, sir; shall
I light you down?'

Mr Dorrit professed himself obliged, and went down. Mr Flintwinch shut
him out, and chained him out, without a moment's loss of time.
He was again passed by the two men, one going out and the other coming
in; got into the vehicle he had left waiting, and was driven away.

Before he had gone far, the driver stopped to let him know that he
had given his name, number, and address to the two men, on their joint
requisition; and also the address at which he had taken Mr Dorrit up,
the hour at which he had been called from his stand and the way by which
he had come. This did not make the night's adventure run any less hotly
in Mr Dorrit's mind, either when he sat down by his fire again, or
when he went to bed. All night he haunted the dismal house, saw the two
people resolutely waiting, heard the woman with her apron over her face
cry out about the noise, and found the body of the missing Blandois, now
buried in the cellar, and now bricked up in a wall.




CHAPTER 18. A Castle in the Air


Manifold are the cares of wealth and state. Mr Dorrit's satisfaction in
remembering that it had not been necessary for him to announce himself
to Clennam and Co., or to make an allusion to his having had any
knowledge of the intrusive person of that name, had been damped
over-night, while it was still fresh, by a debate that arose within him
whether or no he should take the Marshalsea in his way back, and look
at the old gate. He had decided not to do so; and had astonished the
coachman by being very fierce with him for proposing to go over London
Bridge and recross the river by Waterloo Bridge--a course which would
have taken him almost within sight of his old quarters. Still, for all
that, the question had raised a conflict in his breast; and, for some
odd reason or no reason, he was vaguely dissatisfied. Even at the Merdle
dinner-table next day, he was so out of sorts about it that he
continued at intervals to turn it over and over, in a manner frightfully
inconsistent with the good society surrounding him. It made him hot to
think what the Chief Butler's opinion of him would have been, if that
illustrious personage could have plumbed with that heavy eye of his the
stream of his meditations.

The farewell banquet was of a gorgeous nature, and wound up his visit
in a most brilliant manner. Fanny combined with the attractions of her
youth and beauty, a certain weight of self-sustainment as if she had
been married twenty years. He felt that he could leave her with a
quiet mind to tread the paths of distinction, and wished--but without
abatement of patronage, and without prejudice to the retiring virtues of
his favourite child--that he had such another daughter.

'My dear,' he told her at parting, 'our family looks to you
to--ha--assert its dignity and--hum--maintain its importance. I know you
will never disappoint it.'

'No, papa,' said Fanny, 'you may rely upon that, I think. My best love
to dearest Amy, and I will write to her very soon.'

'Shall I convey any message to--ha--anybody else?' asked Mr Dorrit, in
an insinuating manner.

'Papa,' said Fanny, before whom Mrs General instantly loomed, 'no, I
