
'True enough,' said Arthur.

'You're not going to keep open house for all the poor of London,'
pursued Pancks. 'You're not going to lodge 'em for nothing. You're not
going to open your gates wide and let 'em come free. Not if you know it,
you ain't.'

Mr Casby shook his head, in Placid and benignant generality.

'If a man takes a room of you at half-a-crown a week, and when the week
comes round hasn't got the half-crown, you say to that man, Why have you
got the room, then? If you haven't got the one thing, why have you got
the other? What have you been and done with your money? What do you mean
by it? What are you up to? That's what _you_ say to a man of that sort;
and if you didn't say it, more shame for you!' Mr Pancks here made a
singular and startling noise, produced by a strong blowing effort in the
region of the nose, unattended by any result but that acoustic one.

'You have some extent of such property about the east and north-east
here, I believe?' said Clennam, doubtful which of the two to address.

'Oh, pretty well,' said Pancks. 'You're not particular to east or
north-east, any point of the compass will do for you. What you want is
a good investment and a quick return. You take it where you can find it.
You ain't nice as to situation--not you.'

There was a fourth and most original figure in the Patriarchal tent, who
also appeared before dinner. This was an amazing little old woman, with
a face like a staring wooden doll too cheap for expression, and a stiff
yellow wig perched unevenly on the top of her head, as if the child who
owned the doll had driven a tack through it anywhere, so that it only
got fastened on. Another remarkable thing in this little old woman was,
that the same child seemed to have damaged her face in two or three
places with some blunt instrument in the nature of a spoon; her
countenance, and particularly the tip of her nose, presenting the
phenomena of several dints, generally answering to the bowl of that
article. A further remarkable thing in this little old woman was, that
she had no name but Mr F.'s Aunt.

She broke upon the visitor's view under the following circumstances:
Flora said when the first dish was being put on the table, perhaps Mr
Clennam might not have heard that Mr F. had left her a legacy? Clennam
in return implied his hope that Mr F. had endowed the wife whom he
adored, with the greater part of his worldly substance, if not with all.
Flora said, oh yes, she didn't mean that, Mr F. had made a beautiful
will, but he had left her as a separate legacy, his Aunt. She then
went out of the room to fetch the legacy, and, on her return, rather
triumphantly presented 'Mr F.'s Aunt.'

The major characteristics discoverable by the stranger in Mr F.'s Aunt,
were extreme severity and grim taciturnity; sometimes interrupted by
a propensity to offer remarks in a deep warning voice, which, being
totally uncalled for by anything said by anybody, and traceable to no
association of ideas, confounded and terrified the Mind. Mr F.'s Aunt
may have thrown in these observations on some system of her own, and it
may have been ingenious, or even subtle: but the key to it was wanted.

The neatly-served and well-cooked dinner (for everything about the
Patriarchal household promoted quiet digestion) began with some soup,
some fried soles, a butter-boat of shrimp sauce, and a dish of potatoes.
The conversation still turned on the receipt of rents. Mr F.'s Aunt,
after regarding the company for ten minutes with a malevolent gaze,
delivered the following fearful remark:

'When we lived at Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers.'

Mr Pancks courageously nodded his head and said, 'All right, ma'am.' But
the effect of this mysterious communication upon Clennam was absolutely
to frighten him. And another circumstance invested this old lady with
peculiar terrors. Though she was always staring, she never acknowledged
that she saw any individual. The polite and attentive stranger would
desire, say, to consult her inclinations on the subject of potatoes. His
expressive action would be hopelessly lost upon her, and what could he
do? No man could say, 'Mr F.'s Aunt, will you permit me?' Every man
retired from the spoon, as Clennam did, cowed and baffled.

There was mutton, a steak, and an apple-pie--nothing in the remotest
way connected with ganders--and the dinner went on like a disenchanted
feast, as it truly was. Once upon a time Clennam had sat at that table
taking no heed of anything but Flora; now the principal heed he took
of Flora was to observe, against his will, that she was very fond of
porter, that she combined a great deal of sherry with sentiment, and
that if she were a little overgrown, it was upon substantial grounds.
The last of the Patriarchs had always been a mighty eater, and he
disposed of an immense quantity of solid food with the benignity of a
good soul who was feeding some one else. Mr Pancks, who was always in a
hurry, and who referred at intervals to a little dirty notebook which he
kept beside him (perhaps containing the names of the defaulters he meant
to look up by way of dessert), took in his victuals much as if he were
coaling; with a good deal of noise, a good deal of dropping about, and a
puff and a snort occasionally, as if he were nearly ready to steam away.

All through dinner, Flora combined her present appetite for eating and
drinking with her past appetite for romantic love, in a way that made
Clennam afraid to lift his eyes from his plate; since he could not
look towards her without receiving some glance of mysterious meaning or
warning, as if they were engaged in a plot. Mr F.'s Aunt sat silently
defying him with an aspect of the greatest bitterness, until the removal
of the cloth and the appearance of the decanters, when she originated
another observation--struck into the conversation like a clock, without
consulting anybody.

Flora had just said, 'Mr Clennam, will you give me a glass of port for
Mr F.'s Aunt?'

'The Monument near London Bridge,' that lady instantly proclaimed, 'was
put up arter the Great Fire of London; and the Great Fire of London was
not the fire in which your uncle George's workshops was burned down.'

Mr Pancks, with his former courage, said, 'Indeed, ma'am? All right!'
But appearing to be incensed by imaginary contradiction, or other
ill-usage, Mr F.'s Aunt, instead of relapsing into silence, made the
following additional proclamation:

'I hate a fool!'

She imparted to this sentiment, in itself almost Solomonic, so extremely
injurious and personal a character by levelling it straight at the
visitor's head, that it became necessary to lead Mr F.'s Aunt from
the room. This was quietly done by Flora; Mr F.'s Aunt offering no
resistance, but inquiring on her way out, 'What he come there for,
then?' with implacable animosity.

When Flora returned, she explained that her legacy was a clever
old lady, but was sometimes a little singular, and 'took
dislikes'--peculiarities of which Flora seemed to be proud rather than
otherwise. As Flora's good nature shone in the case, Clennam had no
fault to find with the old lady for eliciting it, now that he was
relieved from the terrors of her presence; and they took a glass or
two of wine in peace. Foreseeing then that the Pancks would shortly get
under weigh, and that the Patriarch would go to sleep, he pleaded the
necessity of visiting his mother, and asked Mr Pancks in which direction
he was going?

'Citywards, sir,' said Pancks.

'Shall we walk together?' said Arthur.

'Quite agreeable,' said Pancks.

Meanwhile Flora was murmuring in rapid snatches for his ear, that there
was a time and that the past was a yawning gulf however and that a
golden chain no longer bound him and that she revered the memory of the
late Mr F. and that she should be at home to-morrow at half-past one
and that the decrees of Fate were beyond recall and that she considered
nothing so improbable as that he ever walked on the north-west side of
Gray's-Inn Gardens at exactly four o'clock in the afternoon. He tried
at parting to give his hand in frankness to the existing Flora--not the
vanished Flora, or the mermaid--but Flora wouldn't have it, couldn't
have it, was wholly destitute of the power of separating herself and him
from their bygone characters. He left the house miserably enough; and
so much more light-headed than ever, that if it had not been his good
fortune to be towed away, he might, for the first quarter of an hour,
have drifted anywhere.

When he began to come to himself, in the cooler air and the absence of
Flora, he found Pancks at full speed, cropping such scanty pasturage of
nails as he could find, and snorting at intervals. These, in conjunction
with one hand in his pocket and his roughened hat hind side before, were
evidently the conditions under which he reflected.

'A fresh night!' said Arthur.

'Yes, it's pretty fresh,' assented Pancks. 'As a stranger you feel the
climate more than I do, I dare say. Indeed I haven't got time to feel
it.'

'You lead such a busy life?'

'Yes, I have always some of 'em to look up, or something to look after.
But I like business,' said Pancks, getting on a little faster. 'What's a
man made for?'

'For nothing else?' said Clennam.

Pancks put the counter question, 'What else?' It packed up, in the
smallest compass, a weight that had rested on Clennam's life; and he
made no answer.

'That's what I ask our weekly tenants,' said Pancks. 'Some of 'em will
pull long faces to me, and say, Poor as you see us, master, we're always
grinding, drudging, toiling, every minute we're awake. I say to them,
What else are you made for? It shuts them up. They haven't a word to
answer. What else are you made for? That clinches it.'

'Ah dear, dear, dear!' sighed Clennam.

'Here am I,' said Pancks, pursuing his argument with the weekly tenant.
'What else do you suppose I think I am made for? Nothing. Rattle me out
of bed early, set me going, give me as short a time as you like to bolt
my meals in, and keep me at it. Keep me always at it, and I'll keep you
always at it, you keep somebody else always at it. There you are with
the Whole Duty of Man in a commercial country.'

When they had walked a little further in silence, Clennam said: 'Have
you no taste for anything, Mr Pancks?'

'What's taste?' drily retorted Pancks.

'Let us say inclination.'

'I have an inclination to get money, sir,' said Pancks, 'if you will
show me how.' He blew off that sound again, and it occurred to his
companion for the first time that it was his way of laughing. He was a
singular man in all respects; he might not have been quite in earnest,
but that the short, hard, rapid manner in which he shot out these
cinders of principles, as if it were done by mechanical revolvency,
seemed irreconcilable with banter.

'You are no great reader, I suppose?' said Clennam.

'Never read anything but letters and accounts. Never collect anything
but advertisements relative to next of kin. If _that's_ a taste, I have
got that. You're not of the Clennams of Cornwall, Mr Clennam?'

'Not that I ever heard of.'

'I know you're not. I asked your mother, sir. She has too much character
to let a chance escape her.'

'Supposing I had been of the Clennams of Cornwall?'

'You'd have heard of something to your advantage.'

'Indeed! I have heard of little enough to my advantage for some time.'

'There's a Cornish property going a begging, sir, and not a Cornish
Clennam to have it for the asking,' said Pancks, taking his note-book
from his breast pocket and putting it in again. 'I turn off here. I wish
you good night.'

'Good night!' said Clennam. But the Tug, suddenly lightened, and
untrammelled by having any weight in tow, was already puffing away into
the distance.

They had crossed Smithfield together, and Clennam was left alone at the
corner of Barbican. He had no intention of presenting himself in his
mother's dismal room that night, and could not have felt more depressed
and cast away if he had been in a wilderness. He turned slowly down
Aldersgate Street, and was pondering his way along towards Saint Paul's,
purposing to come into one of the great thoroughfares for the sake of
their light and life, when a crowd of people flocked towards him on the
same pavement, and he stood aside against a shop to let them pass. As
they came up, he made out that they were gathered around a something
that was carried on men's shoulders. He soon saw that it was a litter,
hastily made of a shutter or some such thing; and a recumbent figure
upon it, and the scraps of conversation in the crowd, and a muddy bundle
carried by one man, and a muddy hat carried by another, informed him
that an accident had occurred. The litter stopped under a lamp before it
had passed him half-a-dozen paces, for some readjustment of the burden;
and, the crowd stopping too, he found himself in the midst of the array.

'An accident going to the Hospital?' he asked an old man beside him, who
stood shaking his head, inviting conversation.

'Yes,' said the man, 'along of them Mails. They ought to be prosecuted
and fined, them Mails. They come a racing out of Lad Lane and Wood
Street at twelve or fourteen mile a hour, them Mails do. The only wonder
is, that people ain't killed oftener by them Mails.'

'This person is not killed, I hope?'

'I don't know!' said the man, 'it an't for the want of a will in them
Mails, if he an't.' The speaker having folded his arms, and set in
comfortably to address his depreciation of them Mails to any of the
bystanders who would listen, several voices, out of pure sympathy with
the sufferer, confirmed him; one voice saying to Clennam, 'They're a
public nuisance, them Mails, sir;' another, '_I_ see one on 'em pull up
within half a inch of a boy, last night;' another, '_I_ see one on 'em
go over a cat, sir--and it might have been your own mother;' and all
representing, by implication, that if he happened to possess any public
influence, he could not use it better than against them Mails.

'Why, a native Englishman is put to it every night of his life, to save
his life from them Mails,' argued the first old man; 'and _he_ knows when
they're a coming round the corner, to tear him limb from limb. What can
you expect from a poor foreigner who don't know nothing about 'em!'

'Is this a foreigner?' said Clennam, leaning forward to look.

In the midst of such replies as 'Frenchman, sir,' 'Porteghee, sir,'
'Dutchman, sir,' 'Prooshan, sir,' and other conflicting testimony, he
now heard a feeble voice asking, both in Italian and in French, for
water. A general remark going round, in reply, of 'Ah, poor fellow,
he says he'll never get over it; and no wonder!' Clennam begged to be
allowed to pass, as he understood the poor creature. He was immediately
handed to the front, to speak to him.

'First, he wants some water,' said he, looking round. (A dozen good
fellows dispersed to get it.) 'Are you badly hurt, my friend?' he asked
the man on the litter, in Italian.

'Yes, sir; yes, yes, yes. It's my leg, it's my leg. But it pleases me to
hear the old music, though I am very bad.'

'You are a traveller! Stay! See, the water! Let me give you some.'

They had rested the litter on a pile of paving stones. It was at a
convenient height from the ground, and by stooping he could lightly
raise the head with one hand and hold the glass to his lips with the
other. A little, muscular, brown man, with black hair and white teeth. A
lively face, apparently. Earrings in his ears.

'That's well. You are a traveller?'

'Surely, sir.'

'A stranger in this city?'

'Surely, surely, altogether. I am arrived this unhappy evening.'

'From what country?'

'Marseilles.'

'Why, see there! I also! Almost as much a stranger here as you, though
born here, I came from Marseilles a little while ago. Don't be cast
down.' The face looked up at him imploringly, as he rose from wiping it,
and gently replaced the coat that covered the writhing figure. 'I won't
leave you till you shall be well taken care of. Courage! You will be
very much better half an hour hence.'

'Ah! Altro, Altro!' cried the poor little man, in a faintly incredulous
tone; and as they took him up, hung out his right hand to give the
forefinger a back-handed shake in the air.

Arthur Clennam turned; and walking beside the litter, and saying an
encouraging word now and then, accompanied it to the neighbouring
hospital of Saint Bartholomew. None of the crowd but the bearers and
he being admitted, the disabled man was soon laid on a table in a cool,
methodical way, and carefully examined by a surgeon who was as near at
hand, and as ready to appear as Calamity herself. 'He hardly knows an
English word,' said Clennam; 'is he badly hurt?'

'Let us know all about it first,' said the surgeon, continuing his
examination with a businesslike delight in it, 'before we pronounce.'

After trying the leg with a finger, and two fingers, and one hand and
two hands, and over and under, and up and down, and in this direction
and in that, and approvingly remarking on the points of interest to
another gentleman who joined him, the surgeon at last clapped the
patient on the shoulder, and said, 'He won't hurt. He'll do very well.
It's difficult enough, but we shall not want him to part with his leg
this time.' Which Clennam interpreted to the patient, who was full of
gratitude, and, in his demonstrative way, kissed both the interpreter's
hand and the surgeon's several times.

'It's a serious injury, I suppose?' said Clennam.

'Ye-es,' replied the surgeon, with the thoughtful pleasure of an artist
contemplating the work upon his easel. 'Yes, it's enough. There's a
compound fracture above the knee, and a dislocation below. They are
both of a beautiful kind.' He gave the patient a friendly clap on the
shoulder again, as if he really felt that he was a very good fellow
indeed, and worthy of all commendation for having broken his leg in a
manner interesting to science.

'He speaks French?' said the surgeon.

'Oh yes, he speaks French.'

'He'll be at no loss here, then.--You have only to bear a little pain
like a brave fellow, my friend, and to be thankful that all goes as
well as it does,' he added, in that tongue, 'and you'll walk again to
a marvel. Now, let us see whether there's anything else the matter, and
how our ribs are?'

There was nothing else the matter, and our ribs were sound. Clennam
remained until everything possible to be done had been skilfully and
promptly done--the poor belated wanderer in a strange land movingly
besought that favour of him--and lingered by the bed to which he was in
due time removed, until he had fallen into a doze. Even then he wrote a
few words for him on his card, with a promise to return to-morrow, and
left it to be given to him when he should awake.

All these proceedings occupied so long that it struck eleven o'clock at
night as he came out at the Hospital Gate. He had hired a lodging for
the present in Covent Garden, and he took the nearest way to that
quarter, by Snow Hill and Holborn.

Left to himself again, after the solicitude and compassion of his last
adventure, he was naturally in a thoughtful mood. As naturally, he
could not walk on thinking for ten minutes without recalling Flora.
She necessarily recalled to him his life, with all its misdirection and
little happiness.

When he got to his lodging, he sat down before the dying fire, as he
had stood at the window of his old room looking out upon the blackened
forest of chimneys, and turned his gaze back upon the gloomy vista by
which he had come to that stage in his existence. So long, so bare,
so blank. No childhood; no youth, except for one remembrance; that one
remembrance proved, only that day, to be a piece of folly.

It was a misfortune to him, trifle as it might have been to another.
For, while all that was hard and stern in his recollection, remained
Reality on being proved--was obdurate to the sight and touch, and
relaxed nothing of its old indomitable grimness--the one tender
recollection of his experience would not bear the same test, and melted
away. He had foreseen this, on the former night, when he had dreamed
with waking eyes, but he had not felt it then; and he had now.

He was a dreamer in such wise, because he was a man who had, deep-rooted
in his nature, a belief in all the gentle and good things his life had
been without. Bred in meanness and hard dealing, this had rescued him
to be a man of honourable mind and open hand. Bred in coldness and
severity, this had rescued him to have a warm and sympathetic heart.
Bred in a creed too darkly audacious to pursue, through its process of
reserving the making of man in the image of his Creator to the making of
his Creator in the image of an erring man, this had rescued him to judge
not, and in humility to be merciful, and have hope and charity.

And this saved him still from the whimpering weakness and cruel
selfishness of holding that because such a happiness or such a virtue
had not come into his little path, or worked well for him, therefore
it was not in the great scheme, but was reducible, when found in
appearance, to the basest elements. A disappointed mind he had, but a
mind too firm and healthy for such unwholesome air. Leaving himself in
the dark, it could rise into the light, seeing it shine on others and
hailing it.

Therefore, he sat before his dying fire, sorrowful to think upon the way
by which he had come to that night, yet not strewing poison on the way
by which other men had come to it. That he should have missed so much,
and at his time of life should look so far about him for any staff to
bear him company upon his downward journey and cheer it, was a just
regret. He looked at the fire from which the blaze departed, from which
the afterglow subsided, in which the ashes turned grey, from which they
dropped to dust, and thought, 'How soon I too shall pass through such
changes, and be gone!'

To review his life was like descending a green tree in fruit and flower,
and seeing all the branches wither and drop off, one by one, as he came
down towards them.

'From the unhappy suppression of my youngest days, through the rigid and
unloving home that followed them, through my departure, my long exile,
my return, my mother's welcome, my intercourse with her since, down to
the afternoon of this day with poor Flora,' said Arthur Clennam, 'what
have I found!'

His door was softly opened, and these spoken words startled him, and
came as if they were an answer:

'Little Dorrit.'




CHAPTER 14. Little Dorrit's Party


Arthur Clennam rose hastily, and saw her standing at the door. This
history must sometimes see with Little Dorrit's eyes, and shall begin
that course by seeing him.

Little Dorrit looked into a dim room, which seemed a spacious one to
her, and grandly furnished. Courtly ideas of Covent Garden, as a place
with famous coffee-houses, where gentlemen wearing gold-laced coats and
swords had quarrelled and fought duels; costly ideas of Covent Garden,
as a place where there were flowers in winter at guineas a-piece,
pine-apples at guineas a pound, and peas at guineas a pint; picturesque
ideas of Covent Garden, as a place where there was a mighty theatre,
showing wonderful and beautiful sights to richly-dressed ladies and
gentlemen, and which was for ever far beyond the reach of poor Fanny or
poor uncle; desolate ideas of Covent Garden, as having all those arches
in it, where the miserable children in rags among whom she had just now
passed, like young rats, slunk and hid, fed on offal, huddled together
for warmth, and were hunted about (look to the rats young and old, all
ye Barnacles, for before God they are eating away our foundations, and
will bring the roofs on our heads!); teeming ideas of Covent Garden, as
a place of past and present mystery, romance, abundance, want, beauty,
ugliness, fair country gardens, and foul street gutters; all confused
together,--made the room dimmer than it was in Little Dorrit's eyes, as
they timidly saw it from the door.

At first in the chair before the gone-out fire, and then turned round
wondering to see her, was the gentleman whom she sought. The brown,
grave gentleman, who smiled so pleasantly, who was so frank and
considerate in his manner, and yet in whose earnestness there was
something that reminded her of his mother, with the great difference
that she was earnest in asperity and he in gentleness. Now he regarded
her with that attentive and inquiring look before which Little Dorrit's
eyes had always fallen, and before which they fell still.

'My poor child! Here at midnight?'

'I said Little Dorrit, sir, on purpose to prepare you. I knew you must
be very much surprised.'

'Are you alone?'

'No sir, I have got Maggy with me.'

Considering her entrance sufficiently prepared for by this mention of
her name, Maggy appeared from the landing outside, on the broad grin.
She instantly suppressed that manifestation, however, and became fixedly
solemn.

'And I have no fire,' said Clennam. 'And you are--' He was going to say
so lightly clad, but stopped himself in what would have been a reference
to her poverty, saying instead, 'And it is so cold.'

Putting the chair from which he had risen nearer to the grate, he made
her sit down in it; and hurriedly bringing wood and coal, heaped them
together and got a blaze.

'Your foot is like marble, my child;' he had happened to touch it, while
stooping on one knee at his work of kindling the fire; 'put it nearer
the warmth.' Little Dorrit thanked him hastily. It was quite warm, it
was very warm! It smote upon his heart to feel that she hid her thin,
worn shoe.

Little Dorrit was not ashamed of her poor shoes. He knew her story, and
it was not that. Little Dorrit had a misgiving that he might blame her
father, if he saw them; that he might think, 'why did he dine to-day,
and leave this little creature to the mercy of the cold stones!' She had
no belief that it would have been a just reflection; she simply knew,
by experience, that such delusions did sometimes present themselves to
people. It was a part of her father's misfortunes that they did.

'Before I say anything else,' Little Dorrit began, sitting before
the pale fire, and raising her eyes again to the face which in its
harmonious look of interest, and pity, and protection, she felt to be a
mystery far above her in degree, and almost removed beyond her guessing
at; 'may I tell you something, sir?'

'Yes, my child.'

A slight shade of distress fell upon her, at his so often calling her a
child. She was surprised that he should see it, or think of such a
slight thing; but he said directly:

'I wanted a tender word, and could think of no other. As you just now
gave yourself the name they give you at my mother's, and as that is the
name by which I always think of you, let me call you Little Dorrit.'

'Thank you, sir, I should like it better than any name.'

'Little Dorrit.'

'Little mother,' Maggy (who had been falling asleep) put in, as a
correction.

'It's all the same, Maggy,' returned Little Dorrit, 'all the same.'

'Is it all the same, mother?'

'Just the same.'

Maggy laughed, and immediately snored. In Little Dorrit's eyes and ears,
the uncouth figure and the uncouth sound were as pleasant as could be.
There was a glow of pride in her big child, overspreading her face, when
it again met the eyes of the grave brown gentleman. She wondered what he
was thinking of, as he looked at Maggy and her. She thought what a
good father he would be. How, with some such look, he would counsel and
cherish his daughter.

'What I was going to tell you, sir,' said Little Dorrit, 'is, that my
brother is at large.'

Arthur was rejoiced to hear it, and hoped he would do well.

'And what I was going to tell you, sir,' said Little Dorrit, trembling
in all her little figure and in her voice, 'is, that I am not to know
whose generosity released him--am never to ask, and am never to be told,
and am never to thank that gentleman with all my grateful heart!'

He would probably need no thanks, Clennam said. Very likely he would be
thankful himself (and with reason), that he had had the means and chance
of doing a little service to her, who well deserved a great one.

'And what I was going to say, sir, is,' said Little Dorrit, trembling
more and more, 'that if I knew him, and I might, I would tell him that
he can never, never know how I feel his goodness, and how my good father
would feel it. And what I was going to say, sir, is, that if I knew him,
and I might--but I don't know him and I must not--I know that!--I would
tell him that I shall never any more lie down to sleep without having
prayed to Heaven to bless him and reward him. And if I knew him, and I
might, I would go down on my knees to him, and take his hand and kiss
it and ask him not to draw it away, but to leave it--O to leave it for a
moment--and let my thankful tears fall on it; for I have no other thanks
to give him!'

Little Dorrit had put his hand to her lips, and would have kneeled to
him, but he gently prevented her, and replaced her in her chair. Her
eyes, and the tones of her voice, had thanked him far better than she
thought. He was not able to say, quite as composedly as usual, 'There,
Little Dorrit, there, there, there! We will suppose that you did know
this person, and that you might do all this, and that it was all done.
And now tell me, Who am quite another person--who am nothing more than
the friend who begged you to trust him--why you are out at midnight, and
what it is that brings you so far through the streets at this late hour,
my slight, delicate,' child was on his lips again, 'Little Dorrit!'

'Maggy and I have been to-night,' she answered, subduing herself with
the quiet effort that had long been natural to her, 'to the theatre
where my sister is engaged.'

'And oh ain't it a Ev'nly place,' suddenly interrupted Maggy, who seemed
to have the power of going to sleep and waking up whenever she chose.
'Almost as good as a hospital. Only there ain't no Chicking in it.'

Here she shook herself, and fell asleep again.

'We went there,' said Little Dorrit, glancing at her charge, 'because
I like sometimes to know, of my own knowledge, that my sister is doing
well; and like to see her there, with my own eyes, when neither she nor
Uncle is aware. It is very seldom indeed that I can do that, because
when I am not out at work, I am with my father, and even when I am out
at work, I hurry home to him. But I pretend to-night that I am at a
party.'

As she made the confession, timidly hesitating, she raised her eyes to
the face, and read its expression so plainly that she answered it.

'Oh no, certainly! I never was at a party in my life.'

She paused a little under his attentive look, and then said, 'I hope
there is no harm in it. I could never have been of any use, if I had
not pretended a little.'

She feared that he was blaming her in his mind for so devising to
contrive for them, think for them, and watch over them, without their
knowledge or gratitude; perhaps even with their reproaches for supposed
neglect. But what was really in his mind, was the weak figure with its
strong purpose, the thin worn shoes, the insufficient dress, and the
pretence of recreation and enjoyment. He asked where the suppositious
party was? At a place where she worked, answered Little Dorrit,
blushing. She had said very little about it; only a few words to
make her father easy. Her father did not believe it to be a grand
party--indeed he might suppose that. And she glanced for an instant at
the shawl she wore.

'It is the first night,' said Little Dorrit, 'that I have ever been away
from home. And London looks so large, so barren, and so wild.' In Little
Dorrit's eyes, its vastness under the black sky was awful; a tremor
passed over her as she said the words.

'But this is not,' she added, with the quiet effort again, 'what I have
come to trouble you with, sir. My sister's having found a friend, a lady
she has told me of and made me rather anxious about, was the first cause
of my coming away from home. And being away, and coming (on purpose)
round by where you lived and seeing a light in the window--'

Not for the first time. No, not for the first time. In Little Dorrit's
eyes, the outside of that window had been a distant star on other nights
than this. She had toiled out of her way, tired and troubled, to look up
at it, and wonder about the grave, brown gentleman from so far off, who
had spoken to her as a friend and protector.

'There were three things,' said Little Dorrit, 'that I thought I would
like to say, if you were alone and I might come up-stairs. First, what I
have tried to say, but never can--never shall--'

'Hush, hush! That is done with, and disposed of. Let us pass to the
second,' said Clennam, smiling her agitation away, making the blaze
shine upon her, and putting wine and cake and fruit towards her on the
table.

'I think,' said Little Dorrit--'this is the second thing, sir--I think
Mrs Clennam must have found out my secret, and must know where I come
from and where I go to. Where I live, I mean.'

'Indeed!' returned Clennam quickly. He asked her, after short
consideration, why she supposed so.

'I think,' replied Little Dorrit, 'that Mr Flintwinch must have watched
me.'

And why, Clennam asked, as he turned his eyes upon the fire, bent his
brows, and considered again; why did she suppose that?

'I have met him twice. Both times near home. Both times at night, when
I was going back. Both times I thought (though that may easily be my
mistake), that he hardly looked as if he had met me by accident.'

'Did he say anything?'

'No; he only nodded and put his head on one side.'

'The devil take his head!' mused Clennam, still looking at the fire;
'it's always on one side.'

He roused himself to persuade her to put some wine to her lips, and to
touch something to eat--it was very difficult, she was so timid and
shy--and then said, musing again:

'Is my mother at all changed to you?'

'Oh, not at all. She is just the same. I wondered whether I had better
tell her my history. I wondered whether I might--I mean, whether you
would like me to tell her. I wondered,' said Little Dorrit, looking at
him in a suppliant way, and gradually withdrawing her eyes as he looked
at her, 'whether you would advise me what I ought to do.'

'Little Dorrit,' said Clennam; and the phrase had already begun, between
these two, to stand for a hundred gentle phrases, according to the
varying tone and connection in which it was used; 'do nothing. I will
have some talk with my old friend, Mrs Affery. Do nothing, Little
Dorrit--except refresh yourself with such means as there are here. I
entreat you to do that.'

'Thank you, I am not hungry. Nor,' said Little Dorrit, as he softly
put her glass towards her, 'nor thirsty.--I think Maggy might like
something, perhaps.'

'We will make her find pockets presently for all there is here,' said
Clennam: 'but before we awake her, there was a third thing to say.'

'Yes. You will not be offended, sir?'

'I promise that, unreservedly.'

'It will sound strange. I hardly know how to say it. Don't think it
unreasonable or ungrateful in me,' said Little Dorrit, with returning
and increasing agitation.

'No, no, no. I am sure it will be natural and right. I am not afraid
that I shall put a wrong construction on it, whatever it is.'

'Thank you. You are coming back to see my father again?'

'Yes.'

'You have been so good and thoughtful as to write him a note, saying
that you are coming to-morrow?'

'Oh, that was nothing! Yes.'

'Can you guess,' said Little Dorrit, folding her small hands tight in
one another, and looking at him with all the earnestness of her soul
looking steadily out of her eyes, 'what I am going to ask you not to
do?'

'I think I can. But I may be wrong.'

'No, you are not wrong,' said Little Dorrit, shaking her head. 'If we
should want it so very, very badly that we cannot do without it, let me
ask you for it.'

'I Will,--I Will.'

'Don't encourage him to ask. Don't understand him if he does ask. Don't
give it to him. Save him and spare him that, and you will be able to
think better of him!'

Clennam said--not very plainly, seeing those tears glistening in her
anxious eyes--that her wish should be sacred with him.

'You don't know what he is,' she said; 'you don't know what he really
is. How can you, seeing him there all at once, dear love, and not
gradually, as I have done! You have been so good to us, so delicately
and truly good, that I want him to be better in your eyes than in
anybody's. And I cannot bear to think,' cried Little Dorrit, covering
her tears with her hands, 'I cannot bear to think that you of all the
world should see him in his only moments of degradation.'

'Pray,' said Clennam, 'do not be so distressed. Pray, pray, Little
Dorrit! This is quite understood now.'

'Thank you, sir. Thank you! I have tried very much to keep myself from
saying this; I have thought about it, days and nights; but when I knew
for certain you were coming again, I made up my mind to speak to you.
Not because I am ashamed of him,' she dried her tears quickly, 'but
because I know him better than any one does, and love him, and am proud
of him.'

Relieved of this weight, Little Dorrit was nervously anxious to be gone.
Maggy being broad awake, and in the act of distantly gloating over the
fruit and cakes with chuckles of anticipation, Clennam made the best
diversion in his power by pouring her out a glass of wine, which she
drank in a series of loud smacks; putting her hand upon her windpipe
after every one, and saying, breathless, with her eyes in a prominent
state, 'Oh, ain't it d'licious! Ain't it hospitally!' When she had
finished the wine and these encomiums, he charged her to load her basket
(she was never without her basket) with every eatable thing upon the
table, and to take especial care to leave no scrap behind. Maggy's
pleasure in doing this and her little mother's pleasure in seeing Maggy
pleased, was as good a turn as circumstances could have given to the
late conversation.

'But the gates will have been locked long ago,' said Clennam, suddenly
remembering it. 'Where are you going?'

'I am going to Maggy's lodging,' answered Little Dorrit. 'I shall be
quite safe, quite well taken care of.'

'I must accompany you there,' said Clennam, 'I cannot let you go alone.'

'Yes, pray leave us to go there by ourselves. Pray do!' begged Little
Dorrit.

She was so earnest in the petition, that Clennam felt a delicacy in
obtruding himself upon her: the rather, because he could well understand
that Maggy's lodging was of the obscurest sort. 'Come, Maggy,' said
Little Dorrit cheerily, 'we shall do very well; we know the way by this
time, Maggy?'

'Yes, yes, little mother; we know the way,' chuckled Maggy. And away
they went. Little Dorrit turned at the door to say, 'God bless you!' She
said it very softly, but perhaps she may have been as audible above--who
knows!--as a whole cathedral choir.

Arthur Clennam suffered them to pass the corner of the street before he
followed at a distance; not with any idea of encroaching a second time
on Little Dorrit's privacy, but to satisfy his mind by seeing her secure
in the neighbourhood to which she was accustomed. So diminutive she
looked, so fragile and defenceless against the bleak damp weather,
flitting along in the shuffling shadow of her charge, that he felt, in
his compassion, and in his habit of considering her a child apart from
the rest of the rough world, as if he would have been glad to take her
up in his arms and carry her to her journey's end.

In course of time she came into the leading thoroughfare where the
Marshalsea was, and then he saw them slacken their pace, and soon turn
down a by-street. He stopped, felt that he had no right to go further,
and slowly left them. He had no suspicion that they ran any risk of
being houseless until morning; had no idea of the truth until long, long
afterwards.

But, said Little Dorrit, when they stopped at a poor dwelling all in
darkness, and heard no sound on listening at the door, 'Now, this is a
good lodging for you, Maggy, and we must not give offence. Consequently,
we will only knock twice, and not very loud; and if we cannot wake them
so, we must walk about till day.'

Once, Little Dorrit knocked with a careful hand, and listened. Twice,
Little Dorrit knocked with a careful hand, and listened. All was close
and still. 'Maggy, we must do the best we can, my dear. We must be
patient, and wait for day.'

It was a chill dark night, with a damp wind blowing, when they came out
into the leading street again, and heard the clocks strike half-past
one. 'In only five hours and a half,' said Little Dorrit, 'we shall be
able to go home.' To speak of home, and to go and look at it, it being
so near, was a natural sequence. They went to the closed gate, and
peeped through into the court-yard. 'I hope he is sound asleep,' said
Little Dorrit, kissing one of the bars, 'and does not miss me.'

The gate was so familiar, and so like a companion, that they put down
Maggy's basket in a corner to serve for a seat, and keeping close
together, rested there for some time. While the street was empty and
silent, Little Dorrit was not afraid; but when she heard a footstep at
a distance, or saw a moving shadow among the street lamps, she was
startled, and whispered, 'Maggy, I see some one. Come away!' Maggy
would then wake up more or less fretfully, and they would wander about a
little, and come back again.

As long as eating was a novelty and an amusement, Maggy kept up pretty
well. But that period going by, she became querulous about the cold, and
shivered and whimpered. 'It will soon be over, dear,' said Little Dorrit
patiently. 'Oh it's all very fine for you, little mother,' returned
Maggy, 'but I'm a poor thing, only ten years old.' At last, in the dead
of the night, when the street was very still indeed, Little Dorrit laid
the heavy head upon her bosom, and soothed her to sleep. And thus she
sat at the gate, as it were alone; looking up at the stars, and seeing
the clouds pass over them in their wild flight--which was the dance at
Little Dorrit's party.

'If it really was a party!' she thought once, as she sat there. 'If it
was light and warm and beautiful, and it was our house, and my poor dear
was its master, and had never been inside these walls. And if Mr
Clennam was one of our visitors, and we were dancing to delightful
music, and were all as gay and light-hearted as ever we could be! I
wonder--' Such a vista of wonder opened out before her, that she sat
looking up at the stars, quite lost, until Maggy was querulous again,
and wanted to get up and walk.

Three o'clock, and half-past three, and they had passed over London
Bridge. They had heard the rush of the tide against obstacles; and
looked down, awed, through the dark vapour on the river; had seen little
spots of lighted water where the bridge lamps were reflected, shining
like demon eyes, with a terrible fascination in them for guilt and
misery. They had shrunk past homeless people, lying coiled up in
nooks. They had run from drunkards. They had started from slinking men,
whistling and signing to one another at bye corners, or running away at
full speed. Though everywhere the leader and the guide, Little Dorrit,
happy for once in her youthful appearance, feigned to cling to and rely
upon Maggy. And more than once some voice, from among a knot of brawling
or prowling figures in their path, had called out to the rest to 'let
the woman and the child go by!'

So, the woman and the child had gone by, and gone on, and five had
sounded from the steeples. They were walking slowly towards the east,
already looking for the first pale streak of day, when a woman came
after them.

'What are you doing with the child?' she said to Maggy.

She was young--far too young to be there, Heaven knows!--and neither
ugly nor wicked-looking. She spoke coarsely, but with no naturally
coarse voice; there was even something musical in its sound.

'What are you doing with yourself?' retorted Maggy, for want of a better
answer.

'Can't you see, without my telling you?'

'I don't know as I can,' said Maggy.

'Killing myself! Now I have answered you, answer me. What are you doing
with the child?'

The supposed child kept her head drooped down, and kept her form close
at Maggy's side.

'Poor thing!' said the woman. 'Have you no feeling, that you keep her
out in the cruel streets at such a time as this? Have you no eyes, that
you don't see how delicate and slender she is? Have you no sense (you
don't look as if you had much) that you don't take more pity on this
cold and trembling little hand?'

She had stepped across to that side, and held the hand between her own
two, chafing it. 'Kiss a poor lost creature, dear,' she said, bending
her face, 'and tell me where's she taking you.'

Little Dorrit turned towards her.

'Why, my God!' she said, recoiling, 'you're a woman!'

'Don't mind that!' said Little Dorrit, clasping one of her hands that
had suddenly released hers. 'I am not afraid of you.'

'Then you had better be,' she answered. 'Have you no mother?'

'No.'

'No father?'

'Yes, a very dear one.'

'Go home to him, and be afraid of me. Let me go. Good night!'

'I must thank you first; let me speak to you as if I really were a
child.'

'You can't do it,' said the woman. 'You are kind and innocent; but you
can't look at me out of a child's eyes. I never should have touched you,
but I thought that you were a child.' And with a strange, wild cry, she
went away.

No day yet in the sky, but there was day in the resounding stones of
the streets; in the waggons, carts, and coaches; in the workers going
to various occupations; in the opening of early shops; in the traffic
at markets; in the stir of the riverside. There was coming day in the
flaring lights, with a feebler colour in them than they would have had
at another time; coming day in the increased sharpness of the air, and
the ghastly dying of the night.

They went back again to the gate, intending to wait there now until it
should be opened; but the air was so raw and cold that Little Dorrit,
leading Maggy about in her sleep, kept in motion. Going round by the
Church, she saw lights there, and the door open; and went up the steps
and looked in.

'Who's that?' cried a stout old man, who was putting on a nightcap as if
he were going to bed in a vault.

'It's no one particular, sir,' said Little Dorrit.

'Stop!' cried the man. 'Let's have a look at you!'

This caused her to turn back again in the act of going out, and to
present herself and her charge before him.

'I thought so!' said he. 'I know _you_.'

'We have often seen each other,' said Little Dorrit, recognising the
sexton, or the beadle, or the verger, or whatever he was, 'when I have
been at church here.'

'More than that, we've got your birth in our Register, you know; you're
one of our curiosities.'

'Indeed!' said Little Dorrit.

'To be sure. As the child of the--by-the-bye, how did you get out so
early?'

'We were shut out last night, and are waiting to get in.'

'You don't mean it? And there's another hour good yet! Come into the
vestry. You'll find a fire in the vestry, on account of the painters.
I'm waiting for the painters, or I shouldn't be here, you may depend
upon it. One of our curiosities mustn't be cold when we have it in our
power to warm her up comfortable. Come along.'

He was a very good old fellow, in his familiar way; and having stirred
the vestry fire, he looked round the shelves of registers for a
particular volume. 'Here you are, you see,' he said, taking it down and
turning the leaves. 'Here you'll find yourself, as large as life. Amy,
daughter of William and Fanny Dorrit. Born, Marshalsea Prison, Parish of
St George. And we tell people that you have lived there, without so much
as a day's or a night's absence, ever since. Is it true?'

'Quite true, till last night.'

'Lord!' But his surveying her with an admiring gaze suggested Something
else to him, to wit: 'I am sorry to see, though, that you are faint and
