
Mr Barnacle solemnly bent his head as who should say, 'I do not deny
that it is a liberty; proceed to take another liberty, and let me know
your business.'

'Allow me to observe that I have been for some years in China, am quite
a stranger at home, and have no personal motive or interest in the
inquiry I am about to make.'

Mr Barnacle tapped his fingers on the table, and, as if he were now
sitting for his portrait to a new and strange artist, appeared to say
to his visitor, 'If you will be good enough to take me with my present
lofty expression, I shall feel obliged.'

'I have found a debtor in the Marshalsea Prison of the name of Dorrit,
who has been there many years. I wish to investigate his confused
affairs so far as to ascertain whether it may not be possible, after
this lapse of time, to ameliorate his unhappy condition. The name of
Mr Tite Barnacle has been mentioned to me as representing some highly
influential interest among his creditors. Am I correctly informed?'

It being one of the principles of the Circumlocution Office never, on
any account whatever, to give a straightforward answer, Mr Barnacle
said, 'Possibly.'

'On behalf of the Crown, may I ask, or as private individual?'

'The Circumlocution Department, sir,' Mr Barnacle replied, 'may have
possibly recommended--possibly--I cannot say--that some public claim
against the insolvent estate of a firm or copartnership to which this
person may have belonged, should be enforced. The question may have
been, in the course of official business, referred to the Circumlocution
Department for its consideration. The Department may have either
originated, or confirmed, a Minute making that recommendation.'

'I assume this to be the case, then.'

'The Circumlocution Department,' said Mr Barnacle, 'is not responsible
for any gentleman's assumptions.'

'May I inquire how I can obtain official information as to the real
state of the case?'

'It is competent,' said Mr Barnacle, 'to any member of the--Public,'
mentioning that obscure body with reluctance, as his natural enemy,
'to memorialise the Circumlocution Department. Such formalities as are
required to be observed in so doing, may be known on application to the
proper branch of that Department.'

'Which is the proper branch?'

'I must refer you,' returned Mr Barnacle, ringing the bell, 'to the
Department itself for a formal answer to that inquiry.'

'Excuse my mentioning--'

'The Department is accessible to the--Public,' Mr Barnacle was always
checked a little by that word of impertinent signification, 'if
the--Public approaches it according to the official forms; if
the--Public does not approach it according to the official forms,
the--Public has itself to blame.'

Mr Barnacle made him a severe bow, as a wounded man of family, a wounded
man of place, and a wounded man of a gentlemanly residence, all rolled
into one; and he made Mr Barnacle a bow, and was shut out into Mews
Street by the flabby footman.

Having got to this pass, he resolved as an exercise in perseverance,
to betake himself again to the Circumlocution Office, and try what
satisfaction he could get there. So he went back to the Circumlocution
Office, and once more sent up his card to Barnacle junior by a messenger
who took it very ill indeed that he should come back again, and who was
eating mashed potatoes and gravy behind a partition by the hall fire.

He was readmitted to the presence of Barnacle junior, and found that
young gentleman singeing his knees now, and gaping his weary way on
to four o'clock.

'I say. Look here. You stick to us in a devil of a manner,' Said
Barnacle junior, looking over his shoulder.

'I want to know--'

'Look here. Upon my soul you mustn't come into the place saying you
want to know, you know,' remonstrated Barnacle junior, turning about and
putting up the eye-glass.

'I want to know,' said Arthur Clennam, who had made up his mind to
persistence in one short form of words, 'the precise nature of the claim
of the Crown against a prisoner for debt, named Dorrit.'

'I say. Look here. You really are going it at a great pace, you know.
Egad, you haven't got an appointment,' said Barnacle junior, as if the
thing were growing serious.

'I want to know,' said Arthur, and repeated his case.

Barnacle junior stared at him until his eye-glass fell out, and then
put it in again and stared at him until it fell out again. 'You have
no right to come this sort of move,' he then observed with the greatest
weakness. 'Look here. What do you mean? You told me you didn't know
whether it was public business or not.'

'I have now ascertained that it is public business,' returned the
suitor, 'and I want to know'--and again repeated his monotonous inquiry.

Its effect upon young Barnacle was to make him repeat in a defenceless
way, 'Look here! Upon my SOUL you mustn't come into the place saying you
want to know, you know!' The effect of that upon Arthur Clennam was
to make him repeat his inquiry in exactly the same words and tone
as before. The effect of that upon young Barnacle was to make him a
wonderful spectacle of failure and helplessness.

'Well, I tell you what. Look here. You had better try the Secretarial
Department,' he said at last, sidling to the bell and ringing it.
'Jenkinson,' to the mashed potatoes messenger, 'Mr Wobbler!'

Arthur Clennam, who now felt that he had devoted himself to the storming
of the Circumlocution Office, and must go through with it, accompanied
the messenger to another floor of the building, where that functionary
pointed out Mr Wobbler's room. He entered that apartment, and found two
gentlemen sitting face to face at a large and easy desk, one of whom was
polishing a gun-barrel on his pocket-handkerchief, while the other was
spreading marmalade on bread with a paper-knife.

'Mr Wobbler?' inquired the suitor.

Both gentlemen glanced at him, and seemed surprised at his assurance.

'So he went,' said the gentleman with the gun-barrel, who was an
extremely deliberate speaker, 'down to his cousin's place, and took the
Dog with him by rail. Inestimable Dog. Flew at the porter fellow when he
was put into the dog-box, and flew at the guard when he was taken out.
He got half-a-dozen fellows into a Barn, and a good supply of Rats, and
timed the Dog. Finding the Dog able to do it immensely, made the match,
and heavily backed the Dog. When the match came off, some devil of
a fellow was bought over, Sir, Dog was made drunk, Dog's master was
cleaned out.'

'Mr Wobbler?' inquired the suitor.

The gentleman who was spreading the marmalade returned, without looking
up from that occupation, 'What did he call the Dog?'

'Called him Lovely,' said the other gentleman. 'Said the Dog was the
perfect picture of the old aunt from whom he had expectations. Found him
particularly like her when hocussed.'

'Mr Wobbler?' said the suitor.

Both gentlemen laughed for some time. The gentleman with the gun-barrel,
considering it, on inspection, in a satisfactory state, referred it to
the other; receiving confirmation of his views, he fitted it into its
place in the case before him, and took out the stock and polished that,
softly whistling.

'Mr Wobbler?' said the suitor.

'What's the matter?' then said Mr Wobbler, with his mouth full.

'I want to know--' and Arthur Clennam again mechanically set forth what
he wanted to know.

'Can't inform you,' observed Mr Wobbler, apparently to his lunch. 'Never
heard of it. Nothing at all to do with it. Better try Mr Clive, second
door on the left in the next passage.'

'Perhaps he will give me the same answer.'

'Very likely. Don't know anything about it,' said Mr Wobbler.

The suitor turned away and had left the room, when the gentleman with
the gun called out 'Mister! Hallo!'

He looked in again.

'Shut the door after you. You're letting in a devil of a draught here!'

A few steps brought him to the second door on the left in the next
passage. In that room he found three gentlemen; number one doing nothing
particular, number two doing nothing particular, number three doing
nothing particular. They seemed, however, to be more directly concerned
than the others had been in the effective execution of the great
principle of the office, as there was an awful inner apartment with a
double door, in which the Circumlocution Sages appeared to be assembled
in council, and out of which there was an imposing coming of papers,
and into which there was an imposing going of papers, almost constantly;
wherein another gentleman, number four, was the active instrument.

'I want to know,' said Arthur Clennam,--and again stated his case in the
same barrel-organ way. As number one referred him to number two, and
as number two referred him to number three, he had occasion to state
it three times before they all referred him to number four, to whom he
stated it again.

Number four was a vivacious, well-looking, well-dressed, agreeable
young fellow--he was a Barnacle, but on the more sprightly side of
the family--and he said in an easy way, 'Oh! you had better not bother
yourself about it, I think.'

'Not bother myself about it?'

'No! I recommend you not to bother yourself about it.'

This was such a new point of view that Arthur Clennam found himself at a
loss how to receive it.

'You can if you like. I can give you plenty of forms to fill up. Lots of
'em here. You can have a dozen if you like. But you'll never go on with
it,' said number four.

'Would it be such hopeless work? Excuse me; I am a stranger in England.'

'_I_ don't say it would be hopeless,' returned number four, with a frank
smile. 'I don't express an opinion about that; I only express an opinion
about you. _I_ don't think you'd go on with it. However, of course, you
can do as you like. I suppose there was a failure in the performance of
a contract, or something of that kind, was there?'

'I really don't know.'

'Well! That you can find out. Then you'll find out what Department the
contract was in, and then you'll find out all about it there.'

'I beg your pardon. How shall I find out?'

'Why, you'll--you'll ask till they tell you. Then you'll memorialise
that Department (according to regular forms which you'll find out) for
leave to memorialise this Department. If you get it (which you may after
a time), that memorial must be entered in that Department, sent to
be registered in this Department, sent back to be signed by that
Department, sent back to be countersigned by this Department, and then
it will begin to be regularly before that Department. You'll find out
when the business passes through each of these stages by asking at both
Departments till they tell you.'

'But surely this is not the way to do the business,' Arthur Clennam
could not help saying.

This airy young Barnacle was quite entertained by his simplicity in
supposing for a moment that it was. This light in hand young Barnacle
knew perfectly that it was not. This touch and go young Barnacle had
'got up' the Department in a private secretaryship, that he might
be ready for any little bit of fat that came to hand; and he fully
understood the Department to be a politico-diplomatic hocus pocus piece
of machinery for the assistance of the nobs in keeping off the
snobs. This dashing young Barnacle, in a word, was likely to become a
statesman, and to make a figure.

'When the business is regularly before that Department, whatever it is,'
pursued this bright young Barnacle, 'then you can watch it from time
to time through that Department. When it comes regularly before this
Department, then you must watch it from time to time through this
Department. We shall have to refer it right and left; and when we refer
it anywhere, then you'll have to look it up. When it comes back to us
at any time, then you had better look _us_ up. When it sticks anywhere,
you'll have to try to give it a jog. When you write to another
Department about it, and then to this Department about it, and don't
hear anything satisfactory about it, why then you had better--keep on
writing.'

Arthur Clennam looked very doubtful indeed. 'But I am obliged to you at
any rate,' said he, 'for your politeness.'

'Not at all,' replied this engaging young Barnacle. 'Try the thing, and
see how you like it. It will be in your power to give it up at any time,
if you don't like it. You had better take a lot of forms away with you.
Give him a lot of forms!' With which instruction to number two, this
sparkling young Barnacle took a fresh handful of papers from numbers one
and three, and carried them into the sanctuary to offer to the presiding
Idol of the Circumlocution Office.

Arthur Clennam put his forms in his pocket gloomily enough, and went
his way down the long stone passage and the long stone staircase. He had
come to the swing doors leading into the street, and was waiting, not
over patiently, for two people who were between him and them to pass out
and let him follow, when the voice of one of them struck familiarly on
his ear. He looked at the speaker and recognised Mr Meagles. Mr Meagles
was very red in the face--redder than travel could have made him--and
collaring a short man who was with him, said, 'come out, you rascal,
come Out!'

It was such an unexpected hearing, and it was also such an unexpected
sight to see Mr Meagles burst the swing doors open, and emerge into the
street with the short man, who was of an unoffending appearance, that
Clennam stood still for the moment exchanging looks of surprise with the
porter. He followed, however, quickly; and saw Mr Meagles going down
the street with his enemy at his side. He soon came up with his old
travelling companion, and touched him on the back. The choleric face
which Mr Meagles turned upon him smoothed when he saw who it was, and he
put out his friendly hand.

'How are you?' said Mr Meagles. 'How d'ye _do?_ I have only just come over
from abroad. I am glad to see you.'

'And I am rejoiced to see you.'

'Thank'ee. Thank'ee!'

'Mrs Meagles and your daughter--?'

'Are as well as possible,' said Mr Meagles. 'I only wish you had come
upon me in a more prepossessing condition as to coolness.'

Though it was anything but a hot day, Mr Meagles was in a heated state
that attracted the attention of the passersby; more particularly as
he leaned his back against a railing, took off his hat and cravat, and
heartily rubbed his steaming head and face, and his reddened ears and
neck, without the least regard for public opinion.

'Whew!' said Mr Meagles, dressing again. 'That's comfortable. Now I am
cooler.'

'You have been ruffled, Mr Meagles. What is the matter?'

'Wait a bit, and I'll tell you. Have you leisure for a turn in the
Park?'

'As much as you please.'

'Come along then. Ah! you may well look at him.' He happened to have
turned his eyes towards the offender whom Mr Meagles had so angrily
collared. 'He's something to look at, that fellow is.'

He was not much to look at, either in point of size or in point of
dress; being merely a short, square, practical looking man, whose hair
had turned grey, and in whose face and forehead there were deep lines of
cogitation, which looked as though they were carved in hard wood. He
was dressed in decent black, a little rusty, and had the appearance of
a sagacious master in some handicraft. He had a spectacle-case in his
hand, which he turned over and over while he was thus in question,
with a certain free use of the thumb that is never seen but in a hand
accustomed to tools.

'You keep with us,' said Mr Meagles, in a threatening kind of Way, 'and
I'll introduce you presently. Now then!'

Clennam wondered within himself, as they took the nearest way to the
Park, what this unknown (who complied in the gentlest manner) could have
been doing. His appearance did not at all justify the suspicion that he
had been detected in designs on Mr Meagles's pocket-handkerchief; nor
had he any appearance of being quarrelsome or violent. He was a quiet,
plain, steady man; made no attempt to escape; and seemed a little
depressed, but neither ashamed nor repentant. If he were a criminal
offender, he must surely be an incorrigible hypocrite; and if he were no
offender, why should Mr Meagles have collared him in the Circumlocution
Office? He perceived that the man was not a difficulty in his own
mind alone, but in Mr Meagles's too; for such conversation as they had
together on the short way to the Park was by no means well sustained,
and Mr Meagles's eye always wandered back to the man, even when he spoke
of something very different.

At length they being among the trees, Mr Meagles stopped short, and
said:

'Mr Clennam, will you do me the favour to look at this man? His name
is Doyce, Daniel Doyce. You wouldn't suppose this man to be a notorious
rascal; would you?'

'I certainly should not.' It was really a disconcerting question, with
the man there.

'No. You would not. I know you would not. You wouldn't suppose him to be
a public offender; would you?'

'No.'

'No. But he is. He is a public offender. What has he been guilty of?
Murder, manslaughter, arson, forgery, swindling, house-breaking, highway
robbery, larceny, conspiracy, fraud? Which should you say, now?'

'I should say,' returned Arthur Clennam, observing a faint smile in
Daniel Doyce's face, 'not one of them.'

'You are right,' said Mr Meagles. 'But he has been ingenious, and he has
been trying to turn his ingenuity to his country's service. That makes
him a public offender directly, sir.'

Arthur looked at the man himself, who only shook his head.

'This Doyce,' said Mr Meagles, 'is a smith and engineer. He is not in a
large way, but he is well known as a very ingenious man. A dozen years
ago, he perfects an invention (involving a very curious secret process)
of great importance to his country and his fellow-creatures. I won't say
how much money it cost him, or how many years of his life he had been
about it, but he brought it to perfection a dozen years ago. Wasn't it a
dozen?' said Mr Meagles, addressing Doyce. 'He is the most exasperating
man in the world; he never complains!'

'Yes. Rather better than twelve years ago.'

'Rather better?' said Mr Meagles, 'you mean rather worse. Well, Mr
Clennam, he addresses himself to the Government. The moment he addresses
himself to the Government, he becomes a public offender! Sir,' said Mr
Meagles, in danger of making himself excessively hot again, 'he ceases
to be an innocent citizen, and becomes a culprit. He is treated from
that instant as a man who has done some infernal action. He is a man to
be shirked, put off, brow-beaten, sneered at, handed over by this
highly-connected young or old gentleman, to that highly-connected young
or old gentleman, and dodged back again; he is a man with no rights in
his own time, or his own property; a mere outlaw, whom it is justifiable
to get rid of anyhow; a man to be worn out by all possible means.'

It was not so difficult to believe, after the morning's experience, as
Mr Meagles supposed.

'Don't stand there, Doyce, turning your spectacle-case over and over,'
cried Mr Meagles, 'but tell Mr Clennam what you confessed to me.'

'I undoubtedly was made to feel,' said the inventor, 'as if I had
committed an offence. In dancing attendance at the various offices, I
was always treated, more or less, as if it was a very bad offence. I
have frequently found it necessary to reflect, for my own self-support,
that I really had not done anything to bring myself into the Newgate
Calendar, but only wanted to effect a great saving and a great
improvement.'

'There!' said Mr Meagles. 'Judge whether I exaggerate. Now you'll be
able to believe me when I tell you the rest of the case.'

With this prelude, Mr Meagles went through the narrative; the
established narrative, which has become tiresome; the matter-of-course
narrative which we all know by heart. How, after interminable attendance
and correspondence, after infinite impertinences, ignorances, and
insults, my lords made a Minute, number three thousand four hundred
and seventy-two, allowing the culprit to make certain trials of his
invention at his own expense. How the trials were made in the presence
of a board of six, of whom two ancient members were too blind to see it,
two other ancient members were too deaf to hear it, one other ancient
member was too lame to get near it, and the final ancient member was too
pig-headed to look at it. How there were more years; more impertinences,
ignorances, and insults. How my lords then made a Minute, number five
thousand one hundred and three, whereby they resigned the business to
the Circumlocution Office. How the Circumlocution Office, in course of
time, took up the business as if it were a bran new thing of yesterday,
which had never been heard of before; muddled the business, addled the
business, tossed the business in a wet blanket. How the impertinences,
ignorances, and insults went through the multiplication table. How there
was a reference of the invention to three Barnacles and a Stiltstalking,
who knew nothing about it; into whose heads nothing could be hammered
about it; who got bored about it, and reported physical impossibilities
about it. How the Circumlocution Office, in a Minute, number eight
thousand seven hundred and forty, 'saw no reason to reverse the decision
at which my lords had arrived.' How the Circumlocution Office, being
reminded that my lords had arrived at no decision, shelved the business.
How there had been a final interview with the head of the Circumlocution
Office that very morning, and how the Brazen Head had spoken, and had
been, upon the whole, and under all the circumstances, and looking at it
from the various points of view, of opinion that one of two courses was
to be pursued in respect of the business: that was to say, either to
leave it alone for evermore, or to begin it all over again.

'Upon which,' said Mr Meagles, 'as a practical man, I then and there, in
that presence, took Doyce by the collar, and told him it was plain to
me that he was an infamous rascal and treasonable disturber of the
government peace, and took him away. I brought him out of the office
door by the collar, that the very porter might know I was a practical
man who appreciated the official estimate of such characters; and here
we are!'

If that airy young Barnacle had been there, he would have frankly told
them perhaps that the Circumlocution Office had achieved its function.
That what the Barnacles had to do, was to stick on to the national ship
as long as they could. That to trim the ship, lighten the ship, clean
the ship, would be to knock them off; that they could but be knocked off
once; and that if the ship went down with them yet sticking to it, that
was the ship's look out, and not theirs.

'There!' said Mr Meagles, 'now you know all about Doyce. Except, which I
own does not improve my state of mind, that even now you don't hear him
complain.'

'You must have great patience,' said Arthur Clennam, looking at him with
some wonder, 'great forbearance.'

'No,' he returned, 'I don't know that I have more than another man.'

'By the Lord, you have more than I have, though!' cried Mr Meagles.

Doyce smiled, as he said to Clennam, 'You see, my experience of these
things does not begin with myself. It has been in my way to know a
little about them from time to time. Mine is not a particular case. I am
not worse used than a hundred others who have put themselves in the same
position--than all the others, I was going to say.'

'I don't know that I should find that a consolation, if it were my case;
but I am very glad that you do.'

'Understand me! I don't say,' he replied in his steady, planning
way, and looking into the distance before him as if his grey eye were
measuring it, 'that it's recompense for a man's toil and hope; but it's
a certain sort of relief to know that I might have counted on this.'

He spoke in that quiet deliberate manner, and in that undertone, which
is often observable in mechanics who consider and adjust with great
nicety. It belonged to him like his suppleness of thumb, or his peculiar
way of tilting up his hat at the back every now and then, as if he were
contemplating some half-finished work of his hand and thinking about it.

'Disappointed?' he went on, as he walked between them under the trees.
'Yes. No doubt I am disappointed. Hurt? Yes. No doubt I am hurt. That's
only natural. But what I mean when I say that people who put themselves
in the same position are mostly used in the same way--'

'In England,' said Mr Meagles.

'Oh! of course I mean in England. When they take their inventions into
foreign countries, that's quite different. And that's the reason why so
many go there.'

Mr Meagles very hot indeed again.

'What I mean is, that however this comes to be the regular way of our
government, it is its regular way. Have you ever heard of any projector
or inventor who failed to find it all but inaccessible, and whom it did
not discourage and ill-treat?'

'I cannot say that I ever have.'

'Have you ever known it to be beforehand in the adoption of any useful
thing? Ever known it to set an example of any useful kind?'

'I am a good deal older than my friend here,' said Mr Meagles, 'and I'll
answer that. Never.'

'But we all three have known, I expect,' said the inventor, 'a pretty
many cases of its fixed determination to be miles upon miles, and years
upon years, behind the rest of us; and of its being found out persisting
in the use of things long superseded, even after the better things were
well known and generally taken up?'

They all agreed upon that.

'Well then,' said Doyce, with a sigh, 'as I know what such a metal will
do at such a temperature, and such a body under such a pressure, so I
may know (if I will only consider), how these great lords and gentlemen
will certainly deal with such a matter as mine. I have no right to be
surprised, with a head upon my shoulders, and memory in it, that I fall
into the ranks with all who came before me. I ought to have let it
alone. I have had warning enough, I am sure.'

With that he put up his spectacle-case, and said to Arthur, 'If I don't
complain, Mr Clennam, I can feel gratitude; and I assure you that I
feel it towards our mutual friend. Many's the day, and many's the way in
which he has backed me.'

'Stuff and nonsense,' said Mr Meagles.

Arthur could not but glance at Daniel Doyce in the ensuing silence.
Though it was evidently in the grain of his character, and of his
respect for his own case, that he should abstain from idle murmuring,
it was evident that he had grown the older, the sterner, and the poorer,
for his long endeavour. He could not but think what a blessed thing
it would have been for this man, if he had taken a lesson from the
gentlemen who were so kind as to take a nation's affairs in charge, and
had learnt How not to do it.

Mr Meagles was hot and despondent for about five minutes, and then began
to cool and clear up.

'Come, come!' said he. 'We shall not make this the better by being grim.
Where do you think of going, Dan?'

'I shall go back to the factory,' said Dan.

'Why then, we'll all go back to the factory, or walk in that direction,'
returned Mr Meagles cheerfully. 'Mr Clennam won't be deterred by its
being in Bleeding Heart Yard.'

'Bleeding Heart Yard?' said Clennam. 'I want to go there.'

'So much the better,' cried Mr Meagles. 'Come along!'

As they went along, certainly one of the party, and probably more than
one, thought that Bleeding Heart Yard was no inappropriate destination
for a man who had been in official correspondence with my lords and the
Barnacles--and perhaps had a misgiving also that Britannia herself might
come to look for lodgings in Bleeding Heart Yard some ugly day or other,
if she over-did the Circumlocution Office.



CHAPTER 11. Let Loose


A late, dull autumn night was closing in upon the river Saone. The
stream, like a sullied looking-glass in a gloomy place, reflected the
clouds heavily; and the low banks leaned over here and there, as if they
were half curious, and half afraid, to see their darkening pictures in
the water. The flat expanse of country about Chalons lay a long heavy
streak, occasionally made a little ragged by a row of poplar trees
against the wrathful sunset. On the banks of the river Saone it was wet,
depressing, solitary; and the night deepened fast.

One man slowly moving on towards Chalons was the only visible figure in
the landscape. Cain might have looked as lonely and avoided. With an old
sheepskin knapsack at his back, and a rough, unbarked stick cut out of
some wood in his hand; miry, footsore, his shoes and gaiters trodden
out, his hair and beard untrimmed; the cloak he carried over his
shoulder, and the clothes he wore, sodden with wet; limping along in
pain and difficulty; he looked as if the clouds were hurrying from him,
as if the wail of the wind and the shuddering of the grass were directed
against him, as if the low mysterious plashing of the water murmured at
him, as if the fitful autumn night were disturbed by him.

He glanced here, and he glanced there, sullenly but shrinkingly; and
sometimes stopped and turned about, and looked all round him. Then he
limped on again, toiling and muttering.

'To the devil with this plain that has no end! To the devil with these
stones that cut like knives! To the devil with this dismal darkness,
wrapping itself about one with a chill! I hate you!'

And he would have visited his hatred upon it all with the scowl he threw
about him, if he could. He trudged a little further; and looking into
the distance before him, stopped again.

'I, hungry, thirsty, weary. You, imbeciles, where the lights are yonder,
eating and drinking, and warming yourselves at fires! I wish I had the
sacking of your town; I would repay you, my children!'

But the teeth he set at the town, and the hand he shook at the town,
brought the town no nearer; and the man was yet hungrier, and thirstier,
and wearier, when his feet were on its jagged pavement, and he stood
looking about him.

There was the hotel with its gateway, and its savoury smell of cooking;
there was the cafe with its bright windows, and its rattling of
dominoes; there was the dyer's with its strips of red cloth on the
doorposts; there was the silversmith's with its earrings, and its
offerings for altars; there was the tobacco dealer's with its lively
group of soldier customers coming out pipe in mouth; there were the bad
odours of the town, and the rain and the refuse in the kennels, and
the faint lamps slung across the road, and the huge Diligence, and its
mountain of luggage, and its six grey horses with their tails tied up,
getting under weigh at the coach office. But no small cabaret for a
straitened traveller being within sight, he had to seek one round the
dark corner, where the cabbage leaves lay thickest, trodden about the
public cistern at which women had not yet left off drawing water. There,
in the back street he found one, the Break of Day. The curtained windows
clouded the Break of Day, but it seemed light and warm, and it announced
in legible inscriptions with appropriate pictorial embellishment
of billiard cue and ball, that at the Break of Day one could play
billiards; that there one could find meat, drink, and lodgings, whether
one came on horseback, or came on foot; and that it kept good wines,
liqueurs, and brandy. The man turned the handle of the Break of Day
door, and limped in.

He touched his discoloured slouched hat, as he came in at the door, to
a few men who occupied the room. Two were playing dominoes at one of the
little tables; three or four were seated round the stove, conversing
as they smoked; the billiard-table in the centre was left alone for the
time; the landlady of the Daybreak sat behind her little counter among
her cloudy bottles of syrups, baskets of cakes, and leaden drainage for
glasses, working at her needle.

Making his way to an empty little table in a corner of the room behind
the stove, he put down his knapsack and his cloak upon the ground. As
he raised his head from stooping to do so, he found the landlady beside
him.

'One can lodge here to-night, madame?'

'Perfectly!' said the landlady in a high, sing-song, cheery voice.

'Good. One can dine--sup--what you please to call it?'

'Ah, perfectly!' cried the landlady as before.

'Dispatch then, madame, if you please. Something to eat, as quickly as
you can; and some wine at once. I am exhausted.'

'It is very bad weather, monsieur,' said the landlady.

'Cursed weather.'

'And a very long road.'

'A cursed road.'

His hoarse voice failed him, and he rested his head upon his hands until
a bottle of wine was brought from the counter. Having filled and emptied
his little tumbler twice, and having broken off an end from the great
loaf that was set before him with his cloth and napkin, soup-plate,
salt, pepper, and oil, he rested his back against the corner of the
wall, made a couch of the bench on which he sat, and began to chew
crust, until such time as his repast should be ready.

There had been that momentary interruption of the talk about the stove,
and that temporary inattention to and distraction from one another,
which is usually inseparable in such a company from the arrival of a
stranger. It had passed over by this time; and the men had done glancing
at him, and were talking again.

'That's the true reason,' said one of them, bringing a story he had
been telling, to a close, 'that's the true reason why they said that the
devil was let loose.' The speaker was the tall Swiss belonging to the
church, and he brought something of the authority of the church into the
discussion--especially as the devil was in question.

The landlady having given her directions for the new guest's
entertainment to her husband, who acted as cook to the Break of Day, had
resumed her needlework behind her counter. She was a smart, neat, bright
little woman, with a good deal of cap and a good deal of stocking, and
she struck into the conversation with several laughing nods of her head,
but without looking up from her work.

'Ah Heaven, then,' said she. 'When the boat came up from Lyons, and
brought the news that the devil was actually let loose at Marseilles,
some fly-catchers swallowed it. But I? No, not I.'

'Madame, you are always right,' returned the tall Swiss. 'Doubtless you
were enraged against that man, madame?'

'Ay, yes, then!' cried the landlady, raising her eyes from her work,
opening them very wide, and tossing her head on one side. 'Naturally,
yes.'

'He was a bad subject.'

'He was a wicked wretch,' said the landlady, 'and well merited what he
had the good fortune to escape. So much the worse.'

'Stay, madame! Let us see,' returned the Swiss, argumentatively turning
his cigar between his lips. 'It may have been his unfortunate destiny.
He may have been the child of circumstances. It is always possible that
he had, and has, good in him if one did but know how to find it out.
Philosophical philanthropy teaches--'

The rest of the little knot about the stove murmured an objection to
the introduction of that threatening expression. Even the two players
at dominoes glanced up from their game, as if to protest against
philosophical philanthropy being brought by name into the Break of Day.

'Hold there, you and your philanthropy,' cried the smiling landlady,
nodding her head more than ever. 'Listen then. I am a woman, I. I know
nothing of philosophical philanthropy. But I know what I have seen, and
what I have looked in the face in this world here, where I find myself.
And I tell you this, my friend, that there are people (men and women
both, unfortunately) who have no good in them--none. That there are
people whom it is necessary to detest without compromise. That there are
people who must be dealt with as enemies of the human race. That there
are people who have no human heart, and who must be crushed like savage
beasts and cleared out of the way. They are but few, I hope; but I have
seen (in this world here where I find myself, and even at the little
Break of Day) that there are such people. And I do not doubt that this
man--whatever they call him, I forget his name--is one of them.'

The landlady's lively speech was received with greater favour at
the Break of Day, than it would have elicited from certain amiable
whitewashers of the class she so unreasonably objected to, nearer Great
Britain.

'My faith! If your philosophical philanthropy,' said the landlady,
putting down her work, and rising to take the stranger's soup from her
husband, who appeared with it at a side door, 'puts anybody at the mercy
of such people by holding terms with them at all, in words or deeds, or
both, take it away from the Break of Day, for it isn't worth a sou.'

As she placed the soup before the guest, who changed his attitude to a
sitting one, he looked her full in the face, and his moustache went up
under his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache.

'Well!' said the previous speaker, 'let us come back to our subject.
Leaving all that aside, gentlemen, it was because the man was acquitted
on his trial that people said at Marseilles that the devil was let
loose. That was how the phrase began to circulate, and what it meant;
nothing more.'

'How do they call him?' said the landlady. 'Biraud, is it not?'

'Rigaud, madame,' returned the tall Swiss.

'Rigaud! To be sure.'

The traveller's soup was succeeded by a dish of meat, and that by a dish
of vegetables. He ate all that was placed before him, emptied his bottle
of wine, called for a glass of rum, and smoked his cigarette with
his cup of coffee. As he became refreshed, he became overbearing; and
patronised the company at the Daybreak in certain small talk at which he
assisted, as if his condition were far above his appearance.

The company might have had other engagements, or they might have felt
their inferiority, but in any case they dispersed by degrees, and not
being replaced by other company, left their new patron in possession of
the Break of Day. The landlord was clinking about in his kitchen; the
landlady was quiet at her work; and the refreshed traveller sat smoking
by the stove, warming his ragged feet.

'Pardon me, madame--that Biraud.'

'Rigaud, monsieur.'

'Rigaud. Pardon me again--has contracted your displeasure, how?'

The landlady, who had been at one moment thinking within herself that
this was a handsome man, at another moment that this was an ill-looking
man, observed the nose coming down and the moustache going up, and
strongly inclined to the latter decision. Rigaud was a criminal, she
said, who had killed his wife.

'Ay, ay? Death of my life, that's a criminal indeed. But how do you know
it?'

'All the world knows it.'

'Hah! And yet he escaped justice?'

'Monsieur, the law could not prove it against him to its satisfaction.
So the law says. Nevertheless, all the world knows he did it. The people
knew it so well, that they tried to tear him to pieces.'

'Being all in perfect accord with their own wives?' said the guest. 'Haha!'

The landlady of the Break of Day looked at him again, and felt almost
confirmed in her last decision. He had a fine hand, though, and he
turned it with a great show. She began once more to think that he was
not ill-looking after all.

'Did you mention, madame--or was it mentioned among the gentlemen--what
became of him?'

The landlady shook her head; it being the first conversational stage at
which her vivacious earnestness had ceased to nod it, keeping time to what
she said. It had been mentioned at the Daybreak, she remarked, on the
authority of the journals, that he had been kept in prison for his own
safety. However that might be, he had escaped his deserts; so much the
worse.

The guest sat looking at her as he smoked out his final cigarette, and
as she sat with her head bent over her work, with an expression that
might have resolved her doubts, and brought her to a lasting conclusion
on the subject of his good or bad looks if she had seen it. When she did
look up, the expression was not there. The hand was smoothing his shaggy
moustache.

'May one ask to be shown to bed, madame?'

Very willingly, monsieur. Hola, my husband! My husband would conduct him
up-stairs. There was one traveller there, asleep, who had gone to bed
very early indeed, being overpowered by fatigue; but it was a large
chamber with two beds in it, and space enough for twenty. This the
landlady of the Break of Day chirpingly explained, calling between
whiles, 'Hola, my husband!' out at the side door.

My husband answered at length, 'It is I, my wife!' and presenting
himself in his cook's cap, lighted the traveller up a steep and narrow
staircase; the traveller carrying his own cloak and knapsack, and
bidding the landlady good night with a complimentary reference to the
pleasure of seeing her again to-morrow. It was a large room, with a
rough splintery floor, unplastered rafters overhead, and two bedsteads
on opposite sides. Here 'my husband' put down the candle he carried, and
with a sidelong look at his guest stooping over his knapsack, gruffly
gave him the instruction, 'The bed to the right!' and left him to his
repose. The landlord, whether he was a good or a bad physiognomist, had
fully made up his mind that the guest was an ill-looking fellow.

The guest looked contemptuously at the clean coarse bedding prepared for
him, and, sitting down on the rush chair at the bedside, drew his money
out of his pocket, and told it over in his hand. 'One must eat,' he
muttered to himself, 'but by Heaven I must eat at the cost of some other
man to-morrow!'

As he sat pondering, and mechanically weighing his money in his palm,
the deep breathing of the traveller in the other bed fell so regularly
upon his hearing that it attracted his eyes in that direction. The man
was covered up warm, and had drawn the white curtain at his head, so
that he could be only heard, not seen. But the deep regular breathing,
still going on while the other was taking off his worn shoes and
gaiters, and still continuing when he had laid aside his coat and
cravat, became at length a strong provocative to curiosity, and
incentive to get a glimpse of the sleeper's face.

The waking traveller, therefore, stole a little nearer, and yet a little
nearer, and a little nearer to the sleeping traveller's bed, until he
stood close beside it. Even then he could not see his face, for he had
drawn the sheet over it. The regular breathing still continuing, he put
his smooth white hand (such a treacherous hand it looked, as it went
creeping from him!) to the sheet, and gently lifted it away.

'Death of my soul!' he whispered, falling back, 'here's Cavalletto!'

The little Italian, previously influenced in his sleep, perhaps, by the
stealthy presence at his bedside, stopped in his regular breathing, and
with a long deep respiration opened his eyes. At first they were not
awake, though open. He lay for some seconds looking placidly at his
old prison companion, and then, all at once, with a cry of surprise and
alarm, sprang out of bed.

'Hush! What's the matter? Keep quiet! It's I. You know me?' cried the
other, in a suppressed voice.

But John Baptist, widely staring, muttering a number of invocations
and ejaculations, tremblingly backing into a corner, slipping on
his trousers, and tying his coat by the two sleeves round his neck,
manifested an unmistakable desire to escape by the door rather than
renew the acquaintance. Seeing this, his old prison comrade fell back
upon the door, and set his shoulders against it.

'Cavalletto! Wake, boy! Rub your eyes and look at me. Not the name you
used to call me--don't use that--Lagnier, say Lagnier!'

John Baptist, staring at him with eyes opened to their utmost width,
made a number of those national, backhanded shakes of the right
forefinger in the air, as if he were resolved on negativing beforehand
everything that the other could possibly advance during the whole term
of his life.

'Cavalletto! Give me your hand. You know Lagnier, the gentleman. Touch
the hand of a gentleman!'

Submitting himself to the old tone of condescending authority, John
Baptist, not at all steady on his legs as yet, advanced and put his
hand in his patron's. Monsieur Lagnier laughed; and having given it a
squeeze, tossed it up and let it go.

'Then you were--' faltered John Baptist.

'Not shaved? No. See here!' cried Lagnier, giving his head a twirl; 'as
tight on as your own.'

John Baptist, with a slight shiver, looked all round the room as if to
recall where he was. His patron took that opportunity of turning the key
in the door, and then sat down upon his bed.

'Look!' he said, holding up his shoes and gaiters. 'That's a poor trim
for a gentleman, you'll say. No matter, you shall see how soon I'll mend
it. Come and sit down. Take your old place!'

John Baptist, looking anything but reassured, sat down on the floor at
the bedside, keeping his eyes upon his patron all the time.

'That's well!' cried Lagnier. 'Now we might be in the old infernal hole
again, hey? How long have you been out?'

'Two days after you, my master.'

'How do you come here?'

'I was cautioned not to stay there, and so I left the town at once,
and since then I have changed about. I have been doing odds and ends at
Avignon, at Pont Esprit, at Lyons; upon the Rhone, upon the Saone.' As
he spoke, he rapidly mapped the places out with his sunburnt hand upon
the floor.

'And where are you going?'

'Going, my master?'

'Ay!'

John Baptist seemed to desire to evade the question without knowing how.
'By Bacchus!' he said at last, as if he were forced to the admission, 'I
have sometimes had a thought of going to Paris, and perhaps to England.'

'Cavalletto. This is in confidence. I also am going to Paris and perhaps
to England. We'll go together.'

The little man nodded his head, and showed his teeth; and yet seemed not
quite convinced that it was a surpassingly desirable arrangement.

'We'll go together,' repeated Lagnier. 'You shall see how soon I will
force myself to be recognised as a gentleman, and you shall profit by
it. It is agreed? Are we one?'

'Oh, surely, surely!' said the little man.

'Then you shall hear before I sleep--and in six words, for I want
sleep--how I appear before you, I, Lagnier. Remember that. Not the
other.'

'Altro, altro! Not Ri----' Before John Baptist could finish the name, his
comrade had got his hand under his chin and fiercely shut up his mouth.

'Death! what are you doing? Do you want me to be trampled upon and
stoned? Do _you_ want to be trampled upon and stoned? You would be. You
don't imagine that they would set upon me, and let my prison chum go?
Don't think it!'

There was an expression in his face as he released his grip of his
friend's jaw, from which his friend inferred that if the course of
events really came to any stoning and trampling, Monsieur Lagnier would
so distinguish him with his notice as to ensure his having his full
share of it. He remembered what a cosmopolitan gentleman Monsieur
Lagnier was, and how few weak distinctions he made.

'I am a man,' said Monsieur Lagnier, 'whom society has deeply wronged
since you last saw me. You know that I am sensitive and brave, and that
it is my character to govern. How has society respected those qualities
in me? I have been shrieked at through the streets. I have been guarded
through the streets against men, and especially women, running at me
armed with any weapons they could lay their hands on. I have lain in
prison for security, with the place of my confinement kept a secret,
lest I should be torn out of it and felled by a hundred blows. I have
been carted out of Marseilles in the dead of night, and carried leagues
away from it packed in straw. It has not been safe for me to go near my
house; and, with a beggar's pittance in my pocket, I have walked through
vile mud and weather ever since, until my feet are crippled--look at
them! Such are the humiliations that society has inflicted upon me,
possessing the qualities I have mentioned, and which you know me to
