'Well, sir, well! But is it good taste, is it good taste? That's the
Question.' Mr Rugg was so soothingly persuasive as to be quite pathetic.
'I was almost going to say, is it good feeling? This is an extensive
affair of yours; and your remaining here where a man can come for a
pound or two, is remarked upon as not in keeping. It is not in keeping.
I can't tell you, sir, in how many quarters I heard it mentioned. I
heard comments made upon it last night in a Parlour frequented by what
I should call, if I did not look in there now and then myself, the best
legal company--I heard, there, comments on it that I was sorry to hear.
They hurt me on your account. Again, only this morning at breakfast. My
daughter (but a woman, you'll say: yet still with a feeling for these
things, and even with some little personal experience, as the plaintiff
in Rugg and Bawkins) was expressing her great surprise; her great
surprise. Now under these circumstances, and considering that none of
us can quite set ourselves above public opinion, wouldn't a trifling
concession to that opinion be--Come, sir,' said Rugg, 'I will put it on
the lowest ground of argument, and say, Amiable?'

Arthur's thoughts had once more wandered away to Little Dorrit, and the
question remained unanswered.

'As to myself, sir,' said Mr Rugg, hoping that his eloquence had reduced
him to a state of indecision, 'it is a principle of mine not to consider
myself when a client's inclinations are in the scale. But, knowing your
considerate character and general wish to oblige, I will repeat that I
should prefer your being in the Bench. Your case has made a noise; it
is a creditable case to be professionally concerned in; I should feel on
a better standing with my connection, if you went to the Bench. Don't
let that influence you, sir. I merely state the fact.'

So errant had the prisoner's attention already grown in solitude and
dejection, and so accustomed had it become to commune with only one
silent figure within the ever-frowning walls, that Clennam had to shake
off a kind of stupor before he could look at Mr Rugg, recall the thread
of his talk, and hurriedly say, 'I am unchanged, and unchangeable, in my
decision. Pray, let it be; let it be!' Mr Rugg, without concealing that
he was nettled and mortified, replied:

'Oh! Beyond a doubt, sir. I have travelled out of the record, sir, I am
aware, in putting the point to you. But really, when I hear it remarked
in several companies, and in very good company, that however worthy of a
foreigner, it is not worthy of the spirit of an Englishman to remain in
the Marshalsea when the glorious liberties of his island home admit
of his removal to the Bench, I thought I would depart from the narrow
professional line marked out to me, and mention it. Personally,' said Mr
Rugg, 'I have no opinion on the topic.'

'That's well,' returned Arthur.

'Oh! None at all, sir!' said Mr Rugg. 'If I had, I should have been
unwilling, some minutes ago, to see a client of mine visited in this
place by a gentleman of a high family riding a saddle-horse. But it was
not my business. If I had, I might have wished to be now empowered to
mention to another gentleman, a gentleman of military exterior at
present waiting in the Lodge, that my client had never intended to
remain here, and was on the eve of removal to a superior abode. But my
course as a professional machine is clear; I have nothing to do with it.
Is it your good pleasure to see the gentleman, sir?'

'Who is waiting to see me, did you say?'

'I did take that unprofessional liberty, sir. Hearing that I was your
professional adviser, he declined to interpose before my very limited
function was performed. Happily,' said Mr Rugg, with sarcasm, 'I did not
so far travel out of the record as to ask the gentleman for his name.'

'I suppose I have no resource but to see him,' sighed Clennam, wearily.

'Then it _is_ your good pleasure, sir?' retorted Rugg. 'Am I honoured by
your instructions to mention as much to the gentleman, as I pass out? I
am? Thank you, sir. I take my leave.' His leave he took accordingly, in
dudgeon.

The gentleman of military exterior had so imperfectly awakened Clennam's
curiosity, in the existing state of his mind, that a half-forgetfulness
of such a visitor's having been referred to, was already creeping over
it as a part of the sombre veil which almost always dimmed it now, when
a heavy footstep on the stairs aroused him. It appeared to ascend them,
not very promptly or spontaneously, yet with a display of stride and
clatter meant to be insulting. As it paused for a moment on the
landing outside his door, he could not recall his association with the
peculiarity of its sound, though he thought he had one. Only a moment
was given him for consideration. His door was immediately swung open
by a thump, and in the doorway stood the missing Blandois, the cause of
many anxieties.

'Salve, fellow jail-bird!' said he. 'You want me, it seems. Here I am!'

Before Arthur could speak to him in his indignant wonder, Cavalletto
followed him into the room. Mr Pancks followed Cavalletto. Neither of
the two had been there since its present occupant had had possession of
it. Mr Pancks, breathing hard, sidled near the window, put his hat on
the ground, stirred his hair up with both hands, and folded his arms,
like a man who had come to a pause in a hard day's work. Mr Baptist,
never taking his eyes from his dreaded chum of old, softly sat down on
the floor with his back against the door and one of his ankles in
each hand: resuming the attitude (except that it was now expressive of
unwinking watchfulness) in which he had sat before the same man in the
deeper shade of another prison, one hot morning at Marseilles.

'I have it on the witnessing of these two madmen,' said Monsieur
Blandois, otherwise Lagnier, otherwise Rigaud, 'that you want me,
brother-bird. Here I am!'

Glancing round contemptuously at the bedstead, which was
turned up by day, he leaned his back against it as a resting-place,
without removing his hat from his head, and stood defiantly lounging
with his hands in his pockets.

'You villain of ill-omen!' said Arthur. 'You have purposely cast a
dreadful suspicion upon my mother's house. Why have you done it?
What prompted you to the devilish invention?'

Monsieur Rigaud, after frowning at him for a moment, laughed. 'Hear this
noble gentleman! Listen, all the world, to this creature of Virtue! But
take care, take care. It is possible, my friend, that your ardour is a
little compromising. Holy Blue! It is possible.'

'Signore!' interposed Cavalletto, also addressing Arthur: 'for to
commence, hear me! I received your instructions to find him, Rigaud; is
it not?'

'It is the truth.'

'I go, consequentementally,'--it would have given Mrs Plornish great
concern if she could have been persuaded that his occasional lengthening
of an adverb in this way, was the chief fault of his English,--'first
among my countrymen. I ask them what news in Londra, of foreigners
arrived. Then I go among the French. Then I go among the Germans. They
all tell me. The great part of us know well the other, and they all tell
me. But!--no person can tell me nothing of him, Rigaud. Fifteen times,'
said Cavalletto, thrice throwing out his left hand with all its fingers
spread, and doing it so rapidly that the sense of sight could hardly
follow the action, 'I ask of him in every place where go the foreigners;
and fifteen times,' repeating the same swift performance, 'they know
nothing. But!--'

At this significant Italian rest on the word 'But,' his backhanded shake
of his right forefinger came into play; a very little, and very
cautiously.

'But!--After a long time when I have not been able to find that he
is here in Londra, some one tells me of a soldier with white
hair--hey?--not hair like this that he carries--white--who lives retired
secrettementally, in a certain place. But!--' with another rest upon
the word, 'who sometimes in the after-dinner, walks, and smokes. It is
necessary, as they say in Italy (and as they know, poor people), to
have patience. I have patience. I ask where is this certain place. One.
believes it is here, one believes it is there. Eh well! It is not here,
it is not there. I wait patientissamentally. At last I find it. Then I
watch; then I hide, until he walks and smokes. He is a soldier with grey
hair--But!--' a very decided rest indeed, and a very vigorous play from
side to side of the back-handed forefinger--'he is also this man that
you see.'

It was noticeable, that, in his old habit of submission to one who had
been at the trouble of asserting superiority over him, he even then
bestowed upon Rigaud a confused bend of his head, after thus pointing
him out.

'Eh well, Signore!' he cried in conclusion, addressing Arthur again. 'I
waited for a good opportunity. I writed some words to Signor Panco,' an
air of novelty came over Mr Pancks with this designation, 'to come and
help. I showed him, Rigaud, at his window, to Signor Panco, who was
often the spy in the day. I slept at night near the door of the house.
At last we entered, only this to-day, and now you see him! As he would
not come up in presence of the illustrious Advocate,' such was Mr
Baptist's honourable mention of Mr Rugg, 'we waited down below there,
together, and Signor Panco guarded the street.'

At the close of this recital, Arthur turned his eyes upon the impudent
and wicked face. As it met his, the nose came down over the moustache
and the moustache went up under the nose. When nose and moustache had
settled into their places again, Monsieur Rigaud loudly snapped his
fingers half-a-dozen times; bending forward to jerk the snaps at Arthur,
as if they were palpable missiles which he jerked into his face.

'Now, Philosopher!' said Rigaud. 'What do you want with me?'

'I want to know,' returned Arthur, without disguising his abhorrence,
'how you dare direct a suspicion of murder against my mother's house?'

'Dare!' cried Rigaud. 'Ho, ho! Hear him! Dare? Is it dare? By Heaven, my
small boy, but you are a little imprudent!'

'I want that suspicion to be cleared away,' said Arthur. 'You shall
be taken there, and be publicly seen. I want to know, moreover,
what business you had there when I had a burning desire to fling you
down-stairs. Don't frown at me, man! I have seen enough of you to know
that you are a bully and coward. I need no revival of my spirits from
the effects of this wretched place to tell you so plain a fact, and one
that you know so well.'

White to the lips, Rigaud stroked his moustache, muttering, 'By Heaven,
my small boy, but you are a little compromising of my lady, your
respectable mother'--and seemed for a minute undecided how to act.
His indecision was soon gone. He sat himself down with a threatening
swagger, and said:

'Give me a bottle of wine. You can buy wine here. Send one of your
madmen to get me a bottle of wine. I won't talk to you without wine.
Come! Yes or no?'

'Fetch him what he wants, Cavalletto,' said Arthur, scornfully,
producing the money.

'Contraband beast,' added Rigaud, 'bring Port wine! I'll drink nothing
but Porto-Porto.'

The contraband beast, however, assuring all present, with his
significant finger, that he peremptorily declined to leave his post at
the door, Signor Panco offered his services. He soon returned with the
bottle of wine: which, according to the custom of the place, originating
in a scarcity of corkscrews among the Collegians (in common with a
scarcity of much else), was already opened for use.

'Madman! A large glass,' said Rigaud.

Signor Panco put a tumbler before him; not without a visible conflict of
feeling on the question of throwing it at his head.

'Haha!' boasted Rigaud. 'Once a gentleman, and always a gentleman.
A gentleman from the beginning, and a gentleman to the end. What
the Devil! A gentleman must be waited on, I hope? It's a part of my
character to be waited on!'

He half filled the tumbler as he said it, and drank off the contents
when he had done saying it.

'Hah!' smacking his lips. 'Not a very old prisoner _that_! I judge by
your looks, brave sir, that imprisonment will subdue your blood much
sooner than it softens this hot wine. You are mellowing--losing body
and colour already. I salute you!'

He tossed off another half glass: holding it up both before and
afterwards, so as to display his small, white hand.

'To business,' he then continued. 'To conversation. You have shown
yourself more free of speech than body, sir.'

'I have used the freedom of telling you what you know yourself to be.
You know yourself, as we all know you, to be far worse than that.'

'Add, always a gentleman, and it's no matter. Except in that regard, we
are all alike. For example: you couldn't for your life be a gentleman;
I couldn't for my life be otherwise. How great the difference! Let us go
on. Words, sir, never influence the course of the cards, or the course
of the dice. Do you know that? You do? I also play a game, and words are
without power over it.'

Now that he was confronted with Cavalletto, and knew that his story was
known--whatever thin disguise he had worn, he dropped; and faced it out,
with a bare face, as the infamous wretch he was.

'No, my son,' he resumed, with a snap of his fingers. 'I play my game
to the end in spite of words; and Death of my Body and Death of my Soul!
I'll win it. You want to know why I played this little trick that
you have interrupted? Know then that I had, and that I have--do you
understand me? have--a commodity to sell to my lady your respectable
mother. I described my precious commodity, and fixed my price. Touching
the bargain, your admirable mother was a little too calm, too stolid,
too immovable and statue-like. In fine, your admirable mother vexed me.
To make variety in my position, and to amuse myself--what! a gentleman
must be amused at somebody's expense!--I conceived the happy idea of
disappearing. An idea, see you, that your characteristic mother and my
Flintwinch would have been well enough pleased to execute. Ah! Bah,
bah, bah, don't look as from high to low at me! I repeat it. Well enough
pleased, excessively enchanted, and with all their hearts ravished. How
strongly will you have it?'

He threw out the lees of his glass on the ground, so that they nearly
spattered Cavalletto. This seemed to draw his attention to him anew. He
set down his glass and said:

'I'll not fill it. What! I am born to be served. Come then, you
Cavalletto, and fill!'

The little man looked at Clennam, whose eyes were occupied with Rigaud,
and, seeing no prohibition, got up from the ground, and poured out
from the bottle into the glass. The blending, as he did so, of his old
submission with a sense of something humorous; the striving of that
with a certain smouldering ferocity, which might have flashed fire in
an instant (as the born gentleman seemed to think, for he had a wary
eye upon him); and the easy yielding of all to a good-natured, careless,
predominant propensity to sit down on the ground again: formed a very
remarkable combination of character.

'This happy idea, brave sir,' Rigaud resumed after drinking, 'was a
happy idea for several reasons. It amused me, it worried your dear
mama and my Flintwinch, it caused you agonies (my terms for a lesson
in politeness towards a gentleman), and it suggested to all the amiable
persons interested that your entirely devoted is a man to fear. By
Heaven, he is a man to fear! Beyond this; it might have restored her wit
to my lady your mother--might, under the pressing little suspicion your
wisdom has recognised, have persuaded her at last to announce, covertly,
in the journals, that the difficulties of a certain contract would be
removed by the appearance of a certain important party to it. Perhaps
yes, perhaps no. But that, you have interrupted. Now, what is it you
say? What is it you want?'

Never had Clennam felt more acutely that he was a prisoner in bonds,
than when he saw this man before him, and could not accompany him to his
mother's house. All the undiscernible difficulties and dangers he had
ever feared were closing in, when he could not stir hand or foot.

'Perhaps, my friend, philosopher, man of virtue, Imbecile, what you
will; perhaps,' said Rigaud, pausing in his drink to look out of his
glass with his horrible smile, 'you would have done better to leave me
alone?'

'No! At least,' said Clennam, 'you are known to be alive and unharmed.
At least you cannot escape from these two witnesses; and they can
produce you before any public authorities, or before hundreds of
people!'

'But will not produce me before one,' said Rigaud, snapping his
fingers again with an air of triumphant menace. 'To the Devil with your
witnesses! To the Devil with your produced! To the Devil with yourself!
What! Do I know what I know, for that? Have I my commodity on sale, for
that? Bah, poor debtor! You have interrupted my little project. Let it
pass. How then? What remains? To you, nothing; to me, all. Produce
_me_! Is that what you want? I will produce myself, only too quickly.
Contrabandist! Give me pen, ink, and paper.'

Cavalletto got up again as before, and laid them before him in his
former manner. Rigaud, after some villainous thinking and smiling,
wrote, and read aloud, as follows:


'To MRS CLENNAM.

'Wait answer.

'Prison of the Marshalsea.
'At the apartment of your son.

'Dear Madam,
'I am in despair to be informed to-day by our prisoner here
(who has had the goodness to employ spies to seek me, living for politic
reasons in retirement), that you have had fears for my safety.

'Reassure yourself, dear madam. I am well, I am strong and constant.

'With the greatest impatience I should fly to your house, but that I
foresee it to be possible, under the circumstances, that you will not
yet have quite definitively arranged the little proposition I have had
the honour to submit to you. I name one week from this day, for a last
final visit on my part; when you will unconditionally accept it or
reject it, with its train of consequences.

'I suppress my ardour to embrace you and achieve this interesting
business, in order that you may have leisure to adjust its details to
our perfect mutual satisfaction.

'In the meanwhile, it is not too much to propose (our prisoner having
deranged my housekeeping), that my expenses of lodging and nourishment
at an hotel shall be paid by you.

'Receive, dear madam, the assurance of my highest and most distinguished
consideration,

               'RIGAUD BLANDOIS.

'A thousand friendships to that dear Flintwinch.

'I kiss the hands of Madame F.'


When he had finished this epistle, Rigaud folded it and tossed it with
a flourish at Clennam's feet. 'Hola you! Apropos of producing, let
somebody produce that at its address, and produce the answer here.'

'Cavalletto,' said Arthur. 'Will you take this fellow's letter?'

But, Cavalletto's significant finger again expressing that his post was
at the door to keep watch over Rigaud, now he had found him with so much
trouble, and that the duty of his post was to sit on the floor backed up
by the door, looking at Rigaud and holding his own ankles,--Signor Panco
once more volunteered. His services being accepted, Cavalletto suffered
the door to open barely wide enough to admit of his squeezing himself
out, and immediately shut it on him.

'Touch me with a finger, touch me with an epithet, question my
superiority as I sit here drinking my wine at my pleasure,' said Rigaud,
'and I follow the letter and cancel my week's grace. _You_ wanted me? You
have got me! How do you like me?'

'You know,' returned Clennam, with a bitter sense of his helplessness,
'that when I sought you, I was not a prisoner.'

'To the Devil with you and your prison,' retorted Rigaud, leisurely,
as he took from his pocket a case containing the materials for making
cigarettes, and employed his facile hands in folding a few for present
use; 'I care for neither of you. Contrabandist! A light.'

Again Cavalletto got up, and gave him what he wanted. There had been
something dreadful in the noiseless skill of his cold, white hands, with
the fingers lithely twisting about and twining one over another like
serpents. Clennam could not prevent himself from shuddering inwardly, as
if he had been looking on at a nest of those creatures.

'Hola, Pig!' cried Rigaud, with a noisy stimulating cry, as if
Cavalletto were an Italian horse or mule. 'What! The infernal old jail
was a respectable one to this. There was dignity in the bars and stones
of that place. It was a prison for men. But this? Bah! A hospital for
imbeciles!'

He smoked his cigarette out, with his ugly smile so fixed upon his face
that he looked as though he were smoking with his drooping beak of a
nose, rather than with his mouth; like a fancy in a weird picture. When
he had lighted a second cigarette at the still burning end of the first,
he said to Clennam:

'One must pass the time in the madman's absence. One must talk. One
can't drink strong wine all day long, or I would have another bottle.
She's handsome, sir. Though not exactly to my taste, still, by
the Thunder and the Lightning! handsome. I felicitate you on your
admiration.'

'I neither know nor ask,' said Clennam, 'of whom you speak.'

'Della bella Gowana, sir, as they say in Italy. Of the Gowan, the fair
Gowan.'

'Of whose husband you were the--follower, I think?'

'Sir? Follower? You are insolent. The friend.'

'Do you sell all your friends?'

Rigaud took his cigarette from his mouth, and eyed him with a momentary
revelation of surprise. But he put it between his lips again, as he
answered with coolness:

'I sell anything that commands a price. How do your lawyers live, your
politicians, your intriguers, your men of the Exchange? How do you live?
How do you come here? Have you sold no friend? Lady of mine! I rather
think, yes!'

Clennam turned away from him towards the window, and sat looking out at
the wall.

'Effectively, sir,' said Rigaud, 'Society sells itself and sells me: and
I sell Society. I perceive you have acquaintance with another lady. Also
handsome. A strong spirit. Let us see. How do they call her? Wade.'

He received no answer, but could easily discern that he had hit the
mark.

'Yes,' he went on, 'that handsome lady and strong spirit addresses me in
the street, and I am not insensible. I respond. That handsome lady and
strong spirit does me the favour to remark, in full confidence, "I have
my curiosity, and I have my chagrins. You are not more than ordinarily
honourable, perhaps?" I announce myself, "Madame, a gentleman from
the birth, and a gentleman to the death; but _not_ more than ordinarily
honourable. I despise such a weak fantasy." Thereupon she is pleased to
compliment. "The difference between you and the rest is," she answers,
"that you say so." For she knows Society. I accept her congratulations
with gallantry and politeness. Politeness and little gallantries are
inseparable from my character. She then makes a proposition, which is,
in effect, that she has seen us much together; that it appears to her
that I am for the passing time the cat of the house, the friend of
the family; that her curiosity and her chagrins awaken the fancy to be
acquainted with their movements, to know the manner of their life, how
the fair Gowana is beloved, how the fair Gowana is cherished, and so
on. She is not rich, but offers such and such little recompenses for the
little cares and derangements of such services; and I graciously--to do
everything graciously is a part of my character--consent to accept them.
O yes! So goes the world. It is the mode.'

Though Clennam's back was turned while he spoke, and thenceforth to the
end of the interview, he kept those glittering eyes of his that were too
near together, upon him, and evidently saw in the very carriage of the
head, as he passed with his braggart recklessness from clause to clause
of what he said, that he was saying nothing which Clennam did not
already know.

'Whoof! The fair Gowana!' he said, lighting a third cigarette with a
sound as if his lightest breath could blow her away. 'Charming, but
imprudent! For it was not well of the fair Gowana to make mysteries of
letters from old lovers, in her bedchamber on the mountain, that her
husband might not see them. No, no. That was not well. Whoof! The Gowana
was mistaken there.'

'I earnestly hope,' cried Arthur aloud, 'that Pancks may not be long
gone, for this man's presence pollutes the room.'

'Ah! But he'll flourish here, and everywhere,' said Rigaud, with an
exulting look and snap of his fingers. 'He always has; he always will!'
Stretching his body out on the only three chairs in the room besides
that on which Clennam sat, he sang, smiting himself on the breast as the
gallant personage of the song.


     'Who passes by this road so late?
          Compagnon de la Majolaine!
     Who passes by this road so late?
          Always gay!


'Sing the Refrain, pig! You could sing it once, in another jail. Sing
it! Or, by every Saint who was stoned to death, I'll be affronted and
compromising; and then some people who are not dead yet, had better have
been stoned along with them!'


     'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
          Compagnon de la Majolaine!
     Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
          Always gay!'


Partly in his old habit of submission, partly because his not doing it
might injure his benefactor, and partly because he would as soon do
it as anything else, Cavalletto took up the Refrain this time. Rigaud
laughed, and fell to smoking with his eyes shut.

Possibly another quarter of an hour elapsed before Mr Pancks's step was
heard upon the stairs, but the interval seemed to Clennam insupportably
long. His step was attended by another step; and when Cavalletto opened
the door, he admitted Mr Pancks and Mr Flintwinch. The latter was no
sooner visible, than Rigaud rushed at him and embraced him boisterously.

'How do you find yourself, sir?' said Mr Flintwinch, as soon as he could
disengage himself, which he struggled to do with very little ceremony.
'Thank you, no; I don't want any more.' This was in reference to another
menace of attention from his recovered friend. 'Well, Arthur. You
remember what I said to you about sleeping dogs and missing ones. It's
come true, you see.'

He was as imperturbable as ever, to all appearance, and nodded his head
in a moralising way as he looked round the room.

'And this is the Marshalsea prison for debt!' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Hah!
you have brought your pigs to a very indifferent market, Arthur.'

If Arthur had patience, Rigaud had not. He took his little Flintwinch,
with fierce playfulness, by the two lapels of his coat, and cried:

'To the Devil with the Market, to the Devil with the Pigs, and to the
Devil with the Pig-Driver! Now! Give me the answer to my letter.'

'If you can make it convenient to let go a moment, sir,' returned Mr
Flintwinch, 'I'll first hand Mr Arthur a little note that I have for
him.'

He did so. It was in his mother's maimed writing, on a slip of paper,
and contained only these words:


'I hope it is enough that you have ruined yourself. Rest contented
without more ruin. Jeremiah Flintwinch is my messenger and
representative. Your affectionate M. C.'


Clennam read this twice, in silence, and then tore it to pieces. Rigaud
in the meanwhile stepped into a chair, and sat himself on the back with
his feet upon the seat.

'Now, Beau Flintwinch,' he said, when he had closely watched the note to
its destruction, 'the answer to my letter?'

'Mrs Clennam did not write, Mr Blandois, her hands being cramped,
and she thinking it as well to send it verbally by me.' Mr Flintwinch
screwed this out of himself, unwillingly and rustily. 'She sends
her compliments, and says she doesn't on the whole wish to term
you unreasonable, and that she agrees. But without prejudicing the
appointment that stands for this day week.'

Monsieur Rigaud, after indulging in a fit of laughter, descended from
his throne, saying, 'Good! I go to seek an hotel!' But, there his eyes
encountered Cavalletto, who was still at his post.

'Come, Pig,' he added, 'I have had you for a follower against my will;
now, I'll have you against yours. I tell you, my little reptiles, I
am born to be served. I demand the service of this contrabandist as my
domestic until this day week.'

In answer to Cavalletto's look of inquiry, Clennam made him a sign
to go; but he added aloud, 'unless you are afraid of him.' Cavalletto
replied with a very emphatic finger-negative.'No, master, I am not
afraid of him, when I no more keep it secrettementally that he was once
my comrade.' Rigaud took no notice of either remark until he had lighted
his last cigarette and was quite ready for walking.

'Afraid of him,' he said then, looking round upon them all. 'Whoof! My
children, my babies, my little dolls, you are all afraid of him. You
give him his bottle of wine here; you give him meat, drink, and lodging
there; you dare not touch him with a finger or an epithet. No. It is his
character to triumph! Whoof!


     'Of all the king's knights he's the flower,
          And he's always gay!'


With this adaptation of the Refrain to himself, he stalked out of the
room closely followed by Cavalletto, whom perhaps he had pressed into
his service because he tolerably well knew it would not be easy to get
rid of him. Mr Flintwinch, after scraping his chin, and looking about
with caustic disparagement of the Pig-Market, nodded to Arthur, and
followed. Mr Pancks, still penitent and depressed, followed too; after
receiving with great attention a secret word or two of instructions from
Arthur, and whispering back that he would see this affair out, and stand
by it to the end. The prisoner, with the feeling that he was more
despised, more scorned and repudiated, more helpless, altogether more
miserable and fallen than before, was left alone again.




CHAPTER 29. A Plea in the Marshalsea


Haggard anxiety and remorse are bad companions to be barred up with.
Brooding all day, and resting very little indeed at night, will not
arm a man against misery. Next morning, Clennam felt that his health was
sinking, as his spirits had already sunk and that the weight under which
he bent was bearing him down.

Night after night he had risen from his bed of wretchedness at twelve or
one o'clock, and had sat at his window watching the sickly lamps in the
yard, and looking upward for the first wan trace of day, hours before it
was possible that the sky could show it to him. Now when the night came,
he could not even persuade himself to undress.

For a burning restlessness set in, an agonised impatience of the prison,
and a conviction that he was going to break his heart and die there,
which caused him indescribable suffering. His dread and hatred of the
place became so intense that he felt it a labour to draw his breath in
it. The sensation of being stifled sometimes so overpowered him, that
he would stand at the window holding his throat and gasping. At the
same time a longing for other air, and a yearning to be beyond the blind
blank wall, made him feel as if he must go mad with the ardour of the
desire.

Many other prisoners had had experience of this condition before him,
and its violence and continuity had worn themselves out in their cases,
as they did in his. Two nights and a day exhausted it. It came back by
fits, but those grew fainter and returned at lengthening intervals. A
desolate calm succeeded; and the middle of the week found him settled
down in the despondency of low, slow fever.

With Cavalletto and Pancks away, he had no visitors to fear but Mr and
Mrs Plornish. His anxiety, in reference to that worthy pair, was that
they should not come near him; for, in the morbid state of his nerves,
he sought to be left alone, and spared the being seen so subdued and
weak. He wrote a note to Mrs Plornish representing himself as occupied
with his affairs, and bound by the necessity of devoting himself to
them, to remain for a time even without the pleasant interruption of
a sight of her kind face. As to Young John, who looked in daily at a
certain hour, when the turnkeys were relieved, to ask if he could do
anything for him; he always made a pretence of being engaged in writing,
and to answer cheerfully in the negative. The subject of their only
long conversation had never been revived between them. Through all these
changes of unhappiness, however, it had never lost its hold on Clennam's
mind.

The sixth day of the appointed week was a moist, hot, misty day. It
seemed as though the prison's poverty, and shabbiness, and dirt, were
growing in the sultry atmosphere. With an aching head and a weary heart,
Clennam had watched the miserable night out, listening to the fall of
rain on the yard pavement, thinking of its softer fall upon the country
earth. A blurred circle of yellow haze had risen up in the sky in lieu
of sun, and he had watched the patch it put upon his wall, like a bit of
the prison's raggedness. He had heard the gates open; and the badly shod
feet that waited outside shuffle in; and the sweeping, and pumping,
and moving about, begin, which commenced the prison morning. So ill and
faint that he was obliged to rest many times in the process of getting
himself washed, he had at length crept to his chair by the open window.
In it he sat dozing, while the old woman who arranged his room went
through her morning's work.

Light of head with want of sleep and want of food (his appetite, and
even his sense of taste, having forsaken him), he had been two or three
times conscious, in the night, of going astray. He had heard fragments
of tunes and songs in the warm wind, which he knew had no existence.
Now that he began to doze in exhaustion, he heard them again; and voices
seemed to address him, and he answered, and started.

Dozing and dreaming, without the power of reckoning time, so that
a minute might have been an hour and an hour a minute, some abiding
impression of a garden stole over him--a garden of flowers, with a
damp warm wind gently stirring their scents. It required such a painful
effort to lift his head for the purpose of inquiring into this, or
inquiring into anything, that the impression appeared to have become
quite an old and importunate one when he looked round. Beside the
tea-cup on his table he saw, then, a blooming nosegay: a wonderful
handful of the choicest and most lovely flowers.

Nothing had ever appeared so beautiful in his sight. He took them up and
inhaled their fragrance, and he lifted them to his hot head, and he put
them down and opened his parched hands to them, as cold hands are opened
to receive the cheering of a fire. It was not until he had delighted in
them for some time, that he wondered who had sent them; and opened his
door to ask the woman who must have put them there, how they had come
into her hands. But she was gone, and seemed to have been long gone; for
the tea she had left for him on the table was cold. He tried to drink
some, but could not bear the odour of it: so he crept back to his chair
by the open window, and put the flowers on the little round table of
old.

When the first faintness consequent on having moved about had left him,
he subsided into his former state. One of the night-tunes was playing
in the wind, when the door of his room seemed to open to a light touch,
and, after a moment's pause, a quiet figure seemed to stand there, with
a black mantle on it. It seemed to draw the mantle off and drop it on
the ground, and then it seemed to be his Little Dorrit in her old, worn
dress. It seemed to tremble, and to clasp its hands, and to smile, and
to burst into tears.

He roused himself, and cried out. And then he saw, in the loving,
pitying, sorrowing, dear face, as in a mirror, how changed he was; and
she came towards him; and with her hands laid on his breast to keep him
in his chair, and with her knees upon the floor at his feet, and with
her lips raised up to kiss him, and with her tears dropping on him as
the rain from Heaven had dropped upon the flowers, Little Dorrit, a
living presence, called him by his name.

'O, my best friend! Dear Mr Clennam, don't let me see you weep! Unless
you weep with pleasure to see me. I hope you do. Your own poor child
come back!'

So faithful, tender, and unspoiled by Fortune. In the sound of her
voice, in the light of her eyes, in the touch of her hands, so
Angelically comforting and true!

As he embraced her, she said to him, 'They never told me you were ill,'
and drawing an arm softly round his neck, laid his head upon her bosom,
put a hand upon his head, and resting her cheek upon that hand, nursed
him as lovingly, and GOD knows as innocently, as she had nursed her
father in that room when she had been but a baby, needing all the care
from others that she took of them.

When he could speak, he said, 'Is it possible that you have come to me?
And in this dress?'

'I hoped you would like me better in this dress than any other. I have
always kept it by me, to remind me: though I wanted no reminding. I am
not alone, you see. I have brought an old friend with me.'

Looking round, he saw Maggy in her big cap which had been long
abandoned, with a basket on her arm as in the bygone days, chuckling
rapturously.

'It was only yesterday evening that I came to London with my brother.
I sent round to Mrs Plornish almost as soon as we arrived, that I might
hear of you and let you know I had come. Then I heard that you were
here. Did you happen to think of me in the night? I almost believe you
must have thought of me a little. I thought of you so anxiously, and it
appeared so long to morning.'

'I have thought of you--' he hesitated what to call her. She perceived
it in an instant.

'You have not spoken to me by my right name yet. You know what my right
name always is with you.'

'I have thought of you, Little Dorrit, every day, every hour, every
minute, since I have been here.'

'Have you? Have you?'

He saw the bright delight of her face, and the flush that kindled in
it, with a feeling of shame. He, a broken, bankrupt, sick, dishonoured
prisoner.

'I was here before the gates were opened, but I was afraid to come
straight to you. I should have done you more harm than good, at first;
for the prison was so familiar and yet so strange, and it brought back
so many remembrances of my poor father, and of you too, that at first
it overpowered me. But we went to Mr Chivery before we came to the gate,
and he brought us in, and got John's room for us--my poor old room, you
know--and we waited there a little. I brought the flowers to the door,
but you didn't hear me.'

She looked something more womanly than when she had gone away, and the
ripening touch of the Italian sun was visible upon her face. But,
otherwise, she was quite unchanged. The same deep, timid earnestness
that he had always seen in her, and never without emotion, he saw still.
If it had a new meaning that smote him to the heart, the change was in
his perception, not in her.

She took off her old bonnet, hung it in the old place, and noiselessly
began, with Maggy's help, to make his room as fresh and neat as it could
be made, and to sprinkle it with a pleasant-smelling water. When that
was done, the basket, which was filled with grapes and other fruit,
was unpacked, and all its contents were quietly put away. When that was
done, a moment's whisper despatched Maggy to despatch somebody else to
fill the basket again; which soon came back replenished with new
stores, from which a present provision of cooling drink and jelly, and
a prospective supply of roast chicken and wine and water, were the first
extracts. These various arrangements completed, she took out her old
needle-case to make him a curtain for his window; and thus, with a quiet
reigning in the room, that seemed to diffuse itself through the else
noisy prison, he found himself composed in his chair, with Little Dorrit
working at his side.

To see the modest head again bent down over its task, and the nimble
fingers busy at their old work--though she was not so absorbed in it,
but that her compassionate eyes were often raised to his face, and, when
they drooped again had tears in them--to be so consoled and comforted,
and to believe that all the devotion of this great nature was turned to
him in his adversity to pour out its inexhaustible wealth of goodness
upon him, did not steady Clennam's trembling voice or hand, or
strengthen him in his weakness. Yet it inspired him with an inward
fortitude, that rose with his love. And how dearly he loved her now,
what words can tell!

As they sat side by side in the shadow of the wall, the shadow fell like
light upon him. She would not let him speak much, and he lay back in
his chair, looking at her. Now and again she would rise and give him
the glass that he might drink, or would smooth the resting-place of his
head; then she would gently resume her seat by him, and bend over her
work again.

The shadow moved with the sun, but she never moved from his side, except
to wait upon him. The sun went down and she was still there. She had
done her work now, and her hand, faltering on the arm of his chair since
its last tending of him, was hesitating there yet. He laid his hand upon
it, and it clasped him with a trembling supplication.

'Dear Mr Clennam, I must say something to you before I go. I have put it
off from hour to hour, but I must say it.'

'I too, dear Little Dorrit. I have put off what I must say.'

She nervously moved her hand towards his lips as if to stop him; then it
dropped, trembling, into its former place.

'I am not going abroad again. My brother is, but I am not. He was always
attached to me, and he is so grateful to me now--so much too grateful,
for it is only because I happened to be with him in his illness--that
he says I shall be free to stay where I like best, and to do what I like
best. He only wishes me to be happy, he says.'

There was one bright star shining in the sky. She looked up at it while
she spoke, as if it were the fervent purpose of her own heart shining
above her.

'You will understand, I dare say, without my telling you, that my
brother has come home to find my dear father's will, and to take
possession of his property. He says, if there is a will, he is sure I
shall be left rich; and if there is none, that he will make me so.'

He would have spoken; but she put up her trembling hand again, and he
stopped.

'I have no use for money, I have no wish for it. It would be of no value
at all to me but for your sake. I could not be rich, and you here. I
must always be much worse than poor, with you distressed. Will you let
me lend you all I have? Will you let me give it you? Will you let me
show you that I have never forgotten, that I never can forget, your
protection of me when this was my home? Dear Mr Clennam, make me of all
the world the happiest, by saying Yes? Make me as happy as I can be in
leaving you here, by saying nothing to-night, and letting me go
away with the hope that you will think of it kindly; and that for my
sake--not for yours, for mine, for nobody's but mine!--you will give me
the greatest joy I can experience on earth, the joy of knowing that I
have been serviceable to you, and that I have paid some little of the
great debt of my affection and gratitude. I can't say what I wish to
say. I can't visit you here where I have lived so long, I can't think of
you here where I have seen so much, and be as calm and comforting as I
ought. My tears will make their way. I cannot keep them back. But
pray, pray, pray, do not turn from your Little Dorrit, now, in your
affliction! Pray, pray, pray, I beg you and implore you with all my
grieving heart, my friend--my dear!--take all I have, and make it a
Blessing to me!'

The star had shone on her face until now, when her face sank upon his
hand and her own.

It had grown darker when he raised her in his encircling arm, and softly
answered her.

'No, darling Little Dorrit. No, my child. I must not hear of such a
sacrifice. Liberty and hope would be so dear, bought at such a price,
that I could never support their weight, never bear the reproach of
possessing them. But with what ardent thankfulness and love I say this,
I may call Heaven to witness!'

'And yet you will not let me be faithful to you in your affliction?'

'Say, dearest Little Dorrit, and yet I will try to be faithful to you.
If, in the bygone days when this was your home and when this was your
dress, I had understood myself (I speak only of myself) better, and
had read the secrets of my own breast more distinctly; if, through my
reserve and self-mistrust, I had discerned a light that I see brightly
now when it has passed far away, and my weak footsteps can never
overtake it; if I had then known, and told you that I loved and honoured
you, not as the poor child I used to call you, but as a woman whose
true hand would raise me high above myself and make me a far happier and
better man; if I had so used the opportunity there is no recalling--as
I wish I had, O I wish I had!--and if something had kept us apart then,
when I was moderately thriving, and when you were poor; I might have met
your noble offer of your fortune, dearest girl, with other words than
these, and still have blushed to touch it. But, as it is, I must never
touch it, never!'

She besought him, more pathetically and earnestly, with her little
supplicatory hand, than she could have done in any words.

'I am disgraced enough, my Little Dorrit. I must not descend so low as
that, and carry you--so dear, so generous, so good--down with me. GOD
bless you, GOD reward you! It is past.'

He took her in his arms, as if she had been his daughter.

'Always so much older, so much rougher, and so much less worthy, even
what I was must be dismissed by both of us, and you must see me only as
I am. I put this parting kiss upon your cheek, my child--who might have
been more near to me, who never could have been more dear--a ruined man
far removed from you, for ever separated from you, whose course is
run while yours is but beginning. I have not the courage to ask to be
forgotten by you in my humiliation; but I ask to be remembered only as I
am.'

The bell began to ring, warning visitors to depart. He took her mantle
from the wall, and tenderly wrapped it round her.

'One other word, my Little Dorrit. A hard one to me, but it is a
necessary one. The time when you and this prison had anything in common
has long gone by. Do you understand?'

'O! you will never say to me,' she cried, weeping bitterly, and holding
up her clasped hands in entreaty, 'that I am not to come back any more!
You will surely not desert me so!'

'I would say it, if I could; but I have not the courage quite to shut
out this dear face, and abandon all hope of its return. But do not come
soon, do not come often! This is now a tainted place, and I well know
the taint of it clings to me. You belong to much brighter and better
scenes. You are not to look back here, my Little Dorrit; you are to look
away to very different and much happier paths. Again, GOD bless you in
them! GOD reward you!'

Maggy, who had fallen into very low spirits, here cried, 'Oh get him
into a hospital; do get him into a hospital, Mother! He'll never look
like hisself again, if he an't got into a hospital. And then the little
woman as was always a spinning at her wheel, she can go to the cupboard
with the Princess, and say, what do you keep the Chicking there for? and
then they can take it out and give it to him, and then all be happy!'

The interruption was seasonable, for the bell had nearly rung itself
out. Again tenderly wrapping her mantle about her, and taking her on his
arm (though, but for her visit, he was almost too weak to walk), Arthur
led Little Dorrit down-stairs. She was the last visitor to pass out at
the Lodge, and the gate jarred heavily and hopelessly upon her.

With the funeral clang that it sounded into Arthur's heart, his sense of
weakness returned. It was a toilsome journey up-stairs to his room, and
he re-entered its dark solitary precincts in unutterable misery.

When it was almost midnight, and the prison had long been quiet, a
cautious creak came up the stairs, and a cautious tap of a key was given
at his door. It was Young John. He glided in, in his stockings, and held
the door closed, while he spoke in a whisper.

'It's against all rules, but I don't mind. I was determined to come
through, and come to you.'

'What is the matter?'

'Nothing's the matter, sir. I was waiting in the court-yard for Miss
Dorrit when she came out. I thought you'd like some one to see that she
was safe.'

'Thank you, thank you! You took her home, John?'

'I saw her to her hotel. The same that Mr Dorrit was at. Miss Dorrit
walked all the way, and talked to me so kind, it quite knocked me over.
Why do you think she walked instead of riding?'

'I don't know, John.'

'To talk about you. She said to me, "John, you was always honourable,
and if you'll promise me that you will take care of him, and never let
him want for help and comfort when I am not there, my mind will be at
rest so far." I promised her. And I'll stand by you,' said John Chivery,
'for ever!'

Clennam, much affected, stretched out his hand to this honest spirit.

'Before I take it,' said John, looking at it, without coming from the
door, 'guess what message Miss Dorrit gave me.'

Clennam shook his head.

'"Tell him,"' repeated John, in a distinct, though quavering voice,
'"that his Little Dorrit sent him her undying love." Now it's delivered.
Have I been honourable, sir?'

'Very, very!'

'Will you tell Miss Dorrit I've been honourable, sir?'

'I will indeed.'

'There's my hand, sir,' said John, 'and I'll stand by you forever!'

